

 
1
 
[GRIFFITH WILLIAMS, J., AND ZEKIA, J.] 
(July 1, 1953) 
AHMED MOULLA MOUSTAFA OF FAMAGUSTA, 
Appellant, 
v. 
                  EMINE ALI OSMAN OF KOROVIA,            Respondent.     
(T.F.C. Appeal No. 6.)
 
         1953 
July 1 
      ______ 
       AHMED 
      MOULLA 
    MOUSTAFA 
         v. 
    EMİNE ALI 
     OSMAN 
 
 
Divorce  on  ground  of  adultery  under  set.  26  of  the  Turkish  Family  
(Marriage  and  Divorce)  Law,  1951  ––  No  suit  for  divorce  after  
the  expiration  of  six  months  from  the  occurrence  of  the  event  
constituting the ground of divorce.  
             The  period  for  the  limitation  of  actions  does  not  necessarily 
run from the day the adulterous relations started but from the date 
or dates on which the act or acts of adultery, on which the petition 
for divorce is based, have been committed. 
              Amount of compensation payable to an innocent husband who 
obtains a decree of divorce on the ground of adultery by his wife 
is    to    be    assessed    by    taking    into    consideration    (a)    the    
circumstances   of   the   case,   (b)   the   pecuniary   position   or   
expectations  of  the  wife  and  (c)  the  injury  to  the  person  or  
reputation of the husband. 
             The award of £10 as compensation in favour of the husband, in 
the circumstances of the case, was found unreasonably low and it 
was increased to £250. 
______________ 
 
 
 
      Appeal  by  plaintiff  from  the  judgment  of  the  Turkish  Family  Court  
of Famagusta (Action No. 92/51). 
       A. Zaim for the appellant. 
       U. Emin for the respondent. 
       The  facts  sufficiently  appear  in  the  judgment  of  this  Court  which  
was delivered by : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       ZEKIA,  J:  The  appellant  and  respondent  were  married  in1936  in 
accordance  with  the  Sheri  Law.  The  prompt  dower  fixed  for  the  wife  
was  £40.  The  couple  lived  together  happily  up  to  the  28th  October,  
1950, and had four children. On that date the wife without any lawful 
excuse  deserted  the  husband  and  the  conjugal  home  and  started  
adulterous  association  with  a  certain  Ali  Vechi  of  Korovia,  her  native  
village, and co-habited with him up to April 1951. For some reason or 
other  the  respondent  in  April  left  the  co-respondent's  house  and  lived  
with  her  father  at  Korovia  until  the  8.9.1951.  On  this  day  she  left  the  
father's house and resumed co-habitation with the said Ali Vechi up to 
 

 
2
         1953 
        July 1 
      ______ 
    AHMED 
  MOULLA 
MOUSTAFA 
         v. 
EMINE ALI 
    OSMAN 
the death of the latter, which occurred on the 6.11.1951. The appellant 
instituted  this  action  against  his    wife,    the  respondent,  on  the  2nd  
November,  1951,  claiming  (a) a  decree  of  divorce  on  the  ground  of  
adultery and desertion ; (b) £695 as damages and compensation for the 
work  he  had  done  on  the  property  of  the  respondent;  and  (c)  £1,000  
damages as compensation for the breaking of  the marriage union.  The  
respondent counterclaimed for  (a) £788. 15s. representing the value of 
produce collected by appellant from her property (fields and trees); (b) 
£40 agreed  prompt  dower payable by plaintiff to the defendant as per 
marriage  contract;  (c) custody  of the two youngest children. 
        Desertion  and  adulterous association  with  the  co-respondent  on  
the  dates  mentioned  was  not  denied  by  the  respondent.  Prompt  dower  
also  was  not  disputed  but  it  was  alleged  that  it  had  been  prescribed.  
The  damages  claimed  in  the  action  and  in  the  counter-claim  were  
disputed.  The  claim  for  a  decree  of  divorce  was  opposed  by  the  
respondent on the ground that her husband had condoned or connived 
at  the  commission  of  the  adultery.  The  trial  Judge  gave  judgment  on  
the l0th June, 1952, granting the appellant his divorce on the ground of 
desertion,  but  refusing  to  do  so  on the ground of adultery. Custody of 
all the children was given to the father (appellant). The respondent was 
ordered   to   contribute   £2.   l0s.   monthly   towards   the   cost   of   the   
maintenance and education of the children and the judge dismissed the 
claims  by  both  sides  for  damages  in  relation  to  the  cultivation  of  the  
property of the respondent. The trial judge also dismissed the counter-
claim of £:40 of prompt dower, finding that the respondent's claim for 
dower  was  prescribed.  £10  only  was  awarded  as  compensation  to  the  
appellant for the breaking of the marriage due to wife's, fault, and only 
part of the costs of the action was allowed him.  From this decision of 
the  trial  Court  the  husband  has  appealed  to  this  Court  against  (a)  the  
refusf1l  of  this  trial  Court  to  grant  him  a  divorce  on  the  ground  of  
adultery; (b)    the    smallness    of    the    amount    awarded    him    as    
compensation.   Defendant-respondent   on   the   other   hand   counter-
appealed against (a) the grant of divorce; (b) dismissal of her claim for 
prompt  dower;  (c)  the  order  giving  custody  of  the  children  to  the  
plaintiff  and  the  order  directing  her  to  contribute  £2.  l0s.  a  month  
towards the maintenance of the children. 
 
 
       The learned trial judge refused to grant the divorce on the ground 
of adultery for reasons which he gives in his judgment (page 10 of the 
notes) as follows: 
 
 
             "The  adultery  of  the  defendant  to  ok  place  some  7  months 
prior  to  the  new  Turkish  Family  (Marriage  and  Divorce)  Law  
enactment. And the plaintiff before this law was enacted had full 
power  to  divorce  his  wife  unilaterally  at  any  time  he  liked  at  his  
 
 
 
 
 

 
3
own free will without any formalities. But plaintiff failed to do so 
and keeping silent waited until the new law came into force with 
the hope of getting rid of the burden of paying the dowries of the 
defendant and on top of it claiming damages from her. 
              The  plaintiff  had  full  knowledge  of  the  adultery  of  the  wife 
but he waited for about a period of one year to bring his action for 
divorce on this ground.  
             Section  26  of  Law  4  of  1951  limits  the  time  for  suitors  who 
claim  a  divorce  on  ground  of  adultery  (inter  alia)  to  a  period  of  
six  months  from  the  occurrence  of  the  event  or  from  the  time  
when such event first comes to the knowledge of the party suing 
for divorce. On this ground the plaintiff's claim for divorce fails." 
         1953 
        July 1 
      ______ 
    AHMED 
  MOULLA 
MOUSTAFA 
         v. 
EMINE ALI 
    OSMAN 
 
        Section  26  of  the  Turkish  Family  (Marriage  and  Divorce)  Law, 
1951, reads : 
              "No  suit  for divorce  on  the  ground  set  out  in  paragraphs  (a), 
(b) or (c) of section 25 shall be brought after the expiration of six 
months  from  the  occurrence  of  the  event  constituting  the  ground  
of divorce as in the said paragraphs stated or from the time when 
such  event  comes  to  the  knowledge  of  the  party  suing  for  
divorce." 
Surely  the  phrase  "from  the  occurrence  of  the  event  constituting  the  
ground  of  divorce  ",  in  reference  to  adultery,  should  be  taken  to  refer  
to  the  act  of  adultery  constituting  the  ground  of  divorce.  There  is  
nothing  in  the  section  to  lead  us  to  interpret  the  phrase  in  question  in  
the way done by the trial Court. The material date for the limitation of 
actions is not when the adulterous relations started but it is the date or 
dates  on  which  the  act  or  acts  of  adultery  that  are  put  forward  as  a  
ground of divorce have been committed.           
 
 
              Section  26  corresponds  to  article  129  of  the  Turkish  Civil  Code.  
Commenting  on  this  article  Professor  Osman  Fasil  Berki  in  his  book  
on divorce and separation at page 52 states: 
              "If acts of adultery are many and the adulterous association a 
continuous one then the date of the last act of adultery is to be the 
date on which the time for limitation of action begins to run." 
Footnote  50  refers  to  the  full  Temyis  Court  decision  Civil  Section  
(highest Court of .Appeal in Turkey) which reads: 
             "If  those  committing  adultery  lived  together  as  husband  and 
wife  the  date  for  limitation  of  actions  will  start  to  run  not  from  the  
commission  of  the  first  act  of  adultery  but  from  the  last  day  of  co-
habitation." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       There is nothing in the English Law in conflict with this principle. 
The  husband's  right  to  claim  divorce  on  the  ground  of  adultery  could  
not ordinarily m English Law be defeated by unreasonable delay. This 
kind  of  defence  has  only  been  applied  in  exceptional  circumstances  
 

 
4
        1953 
        July 1 
      ______ 
    AHMED 
  MOULLA 
MOUSTAFA 
         v. 
EMINE ALI 
    OSMAN 
where the delay was deliberate and culpable and its duration covered a 
period  of  several  years.  In  Rickard  v.  Rickard  there  was  a  deliberate  
delay of 12 years m the presentation of a husband's petition which was 
dismissed. On appeal Lord Sterndale, M.R., stated : 
              "  The  word  delay  must  be  understood  to  be  culpable  delay, 
something  in  the  nature  of  connivance  or  acquiescence  "  (page  
158 Latey on Divorce, 14th edition) 
 
       Even  if  one  considered  the  first  period  of  adulterous  association  
being  condoned  by  the  plaintiff-appellant,  the  second  period  might  be  
considered  as  a  cause  of  revival  of  such  condoned  adultery  because  
under  the  English  Law,  assuming  that  it  could  be  resorted  to  in  this  
case,  the  condoned  adultery  may  be  revived  by  familiarities  falling  
short of actual adultery unless indeed there is a case of connivance. In 
this case the adulterous relations were resumed and continued up to the 
filing  of  the  action  for  divorce,  and  even  for  some  days  later.  This  
clearly  constitutes  a  fresh  ground  for  divorce  both  under  the  Turkish  
Family (Marriage and Divorce) Law, 1951, and the English Law. The 
Court  below  was  in  error  therefore  in  holding  that  plaintiff's  right  to  
claim  for  a  divorce  on  the  ground  of  adultery  was  prescribed.  Section  
25  in  dealing  with  the  ground  for  divorce  and  stating  the  commission  
of adultery as a ground adds the following proviso : 
             "  Provided  that  no divorce  shall  be  granted  if  the  Court  is  
satisfied  that  the  party  suing  for  divorce  has  consented  to  the  
adultery or has since condoned it." 
 
 
Condonation  which  is  called  "  forgiveness  "  in  the  Turkish  text  has  
been  judicially  defined,  and  a  summary  of  it  is  given  in  page  147  of  
Latey on Divorce : 
             "Condonation  (which  is  not  defined  by  statute)  is  forgiveness 
and    reconciliation    with    full    knowledge    of    all    material    
circumstances. It is a "blotting out of the offence imputed so as to 
restore   the   offending   party   to   the   same   position   he   or   she   
occupied before the offence was committed" ; mere forgiveness is 
not condonation: to be condonation 'it must completely restore the 
offending party, and must be followed by co-habitation '." 
 
 
In  the  present  case  after  respondents  first  desertion  for  apparently  
establishing  adulterous  association  with  the  co-respondent  they  were  
never  reconciled  and  never  again  lived  together;  so  no  question  of  
condonation  arises.  With  reference  to  consent  or  connivance  Latey  
states: 
             "  Connivance  means  that  the  adultery  or  one  spouse  has  been 
caused  by  or  has  been  knowingly  and  willfully  or  recklessly  
permitted by the other as an accessory." 
 
 
 
Reading from page 136 of the same text- book : 
 

 
5
             "It  is  of  the  essence  of  connivance  that  it  precedes  the  event, 
and  generally  speaking  the  material  event  is  the  inception  of  the  
adultery   and   not   its   repetition,   although   connivance   at   the   
continuance of an adulterous association may show that the party 
conniving  must  be  taken  to  have  done  so  at  the  first.  It  is  of  the  
utmost  importance  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  issue  is  whether,  on  
the  facts  of  the  particular  case,  the  husband  (in  that  case)  was  or  
was   not   guilty   of   the   corrupt   intention   of   promoting   or   
discouraging  either  the  initiation  or  the  continuance  of  the  wife's  
adultery.". 
         1953 
        July 1 
      ______ 
    AHMED 
  MOULLA 
MOUSTAFA 
         v. 
EMINE ALI 
    OSMAN 
 
There  is  nothing  in  this  case  to  indicate  that  the  petitioning  husband  
was guilty of connivance, collusion, consent or condonation so that his 
right  to  claim  divorce  on  the  ground  of  his  wife's  undisputed  adultery  
might be lost. 
Coming  to  the  second  ground  of  appeal  relating  to  the  amount  of  
compensation  awarded  by  the  trial  Court,  section  31  of  the  Turkish  
Family Law, 1951, may be relevantly quoted : 
              "  Upon  a  decree  of  divorce,  the  Court  may  order  the  party  in 
fault  to  pay  such  compensation  to  the  innocent  party  as  to  the  
Court may seem fit, having regard to all the circumstances of the 
case including the pecuniary position or expectations of the party 
in  fault  and  of  the  injury  to  the  person  or  reputation  of  the  
innocent party." 
 
 
 
This  section  corresponds  to  article  143  of  the  Turkish  Family  Law  
(Civil  Code).  There  is  some  difference  between  the  two  enactments,  
namely,  the  provision  in  the  Turkish  Civil  Code  makes  the  pecuniary  
injuries  sustained,  or  anticipated,  by  the  innocent  party  the  basis  for  
assessing  damages,  whereas  in  our  law  the  pecuniary  position  or  
expectation of the party in fault is a factor to be taken into account in 
awarding damages in favour of the innocent party. The injury suffered 
by the person or reputation of the innocent party is by both enactments 
a fact to be taken into consideration m assessing damages. There is no 
analogous  provision  in  English  Law  though  some  assistance  may  be  
derived  in  comparing  it  with  the  principle  of  assessment.  Thus  an  
innocent   husband   in   obtaining   a   decree   of   divorce   against   an   
adulterous wife is entitled to compensation, the amount of which is to 
be    assessed    by    the    Court    taking    into    consideration    (a)    the    
circumstances  of  the  case  (b)  the  pecuniary  position  or  expectation  of  
the wife and (c) the injury to the person or reputation of the husband. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It  is  in  evidence  that  the  respondent  owns  immovable  property  to  the  
value of a few thousand pounds and derives a yearly income from it of 
about  £110.  On  the  other  hand  the  appellant  is  a  farmer  who,  though  
 

 
6
         1953 
        July 1 
      ______ 
    AHMED 
  MOULLA 
MOUSTAFA 
         v. 
EMINE ALI 
    OSMAN 
the owner of some 53 donums of fields at Galatia, has chiefly relied for 
the support of his family on having at his disposal the lands of his wife. 
The  respondent's  services  as  a  wife,  especially  for  looking  after  the  
children of the marriage, were also of value to him. After the desertion 
the respondent took back her property and appellant has been deprived 
of  the  benefit  of  farming  her  lands.  Through  the  conduct  of  the  
respondent  the  appellant's  personal  reputation  must  have  suffered  
injury;  and  compensation  for  his  injured  feelings  is  also  within  the  
scope  of  the  section.  In  the  circumstances  the  award  of  £10  as  
compensation  appears  to  us  to  be  unreasonably  low.  We  think  that  
respondent  should  pay  a  substantial  sum  as  compensation  to  the  
appellant and we assess it at £250. 
 
 
Having dealt with the grounds of appeal we pass to the grounds of the 
cross-appeal. 
 
                As  to  the  1st  ground,  namely,  the  alleged  value  of  produce  
collected  by  appellant  we  see  no  reason  to  differ  from  the  trial  Court.  
The  appellant  cultivated  the  lands  of  his  wife  and  expended  much  
money  and  labour  for  the  improvement  of  the  land.  The  produce  was  
made  use  of  for  the  maintenance  of  the  family.  The  appellant's  wife  
was equally responsible for such maintenance. 
 
 
 
        The second ground of cross-appeal is the claim for prompt dower 
by  the  wife.  The  couple  got  married  in  1936  and  in  the  contract  of  
marriage "Nikah " the bum of £40 was stipulated as prompt dower. In 
addition  to  the  prompt  dower  there  was  also  an  amount  mentioned  as  
deferred  dower  but  respondent  could  not  have  claimed  the  deferred  
dower  owing  to  the  provisions  of  the  Turkish  Family  Law,  1951,  but  
she  could  claim  prompt  dower  within  a  year  after  the  coming  into  
operation of the said law, if such claim was not already prescribed. The 
counterclaim of the respondent  is  dated  16.11.1952  but  by  section  
9 of  the  Limitation of Actions Law, in an action where a counterclaim 
is made the latter shall be deemed to have been commenced on the day 
the  action  was  instituted.  The  action  having  been  instituted  within  a  
year  after  the  enactment  of  the  Turkish  Family  Law,  1951,  the  
counterclaim  for  the  dower  was  entertainable,  if  as  we  said  it  has  not  
been  already  .lost  by  the  Limitation  of  Actions  Law,  1945  (Cap.  21).  
Section 5 of the said Law reads: 
             "No action shall be brought upon for or in respect of any cause 
of  action  not  expressly  provided  for  in  this  Law  or  exempted  
from  the  operation  of  this  Law  after  the  expiration  of  six  years  
from the date when such cause .of action accrued." 
 
 

 
7
 
Those  who  had  a  right  of  action  not  already  prescribed  under  the  
provisions  of  Medjelle  (Old  Law),  and  in  case  where  six  years  had  
already  elapsed  from the date the cause of action accrued, two years 
time was  given  to  bring  such  action.  Therefore, respondent's  wife 
was  entitled  up  to  September,  1947,  to  bring  an  action  against  her  
husband  claiming  her  prompt  dower,  but  after  this  date  she  was  
precluded  by  the    provisions  of  the  Limitation  of.  Actions  Law  to  
pursue  such  claim.  Counsel  for  the  respondent,  however,  based  his  
contention  in  counterclaiming  the  prompt    dower  on  the  ground  that  
the cause of action in case  of prompt dower accrues only when there is 
a clear demand for payment of it by the wife, and in this case there was 
such  a  demand  only  in  1950  by  bringing  an  action  to  recover  prompt  
dower in the Sheri Court, which action  was discontinued  in the same 
year.  Now, therefore, if  the  time  runs  as  from  the  year  1950,  no  
cause    of      action    having  accrued  earlier,  the  counter-claim  for  the  
dower  is  within  time,  We  have  been  referred  to  a  decision  of  the  
Judicial    Committee    of    the    Privy    Council:    Khajurunissa v. 
Saifullahkhan.  The  rule  established  by  this  authority  is  given  in  page  
454 of Mahommedan Law by Said Emir Ali vol, 2, 5th Edition:  
             "  The  prompt  or  exigible  dower,  however,  is  a  debt  always 
due,  and  demandable  during  ‘the  subsistence  of  the  marriage,  
and certainly payable on demand.’ On a clear and unambiguous 
demand by the wife, for payment of dower and its refusal by the 
husband, it has been held by the Judicial Committee of the Privy 
Council  that  a  cause  of  action  accrues,  against  which  limitation  
would begin to run." 
 
         1953 
        July 1 
      ______ 
    AHMED 
  MOULLA 
MOUSTAFA 
         v. 
EMINE ALI 
    OSMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         1953 
The  prompt  dower  has  been  generally  considered  an  ordinary  debt  
immediately    demandable  by    the  wife  and  payable  forthwith  to  her,  
and  it  has  been  invariably  the  practice  in  the  courts  applying  the  
Ottoman  Law  to  regard  such  claims    prescribed    after  the  lapse  of  15  
years  from  the  date  of    Nikah,  the  contract  of  marriage,  the  date  on  
which the prompt dower has been agreed upon," Unfortunately Indian 
reports  are  not  available  in  our  library,  but  from  a  Digest  on  Indian  
cases  available  in  the  library    it  appears  that    the    decision    of    the    
Privy  Council  was based on the Limitation Acts XIV of 1859 and IX 
of 1871. In Cyprus, however, the basic law governing the Limitation of 
Actions  up  to  the  passing  of  the  Limitation  of  Actions  Law,  1945,  
(Cap,  21)  was  the  Ottoman    Law,    that  is    articles    1660    to  1675  of    
Medjelle.  Article 1667 of Medjelle reads:"Pres-cription runs from the 
time  the  plaintiff  is  entitled    to    claim    the    subject-matter  ".    In    the    
same  article  an example is  given  for  claims referring  to dowers in 
the  following  words  :  "  Again    in    an    action  to    recover    deferred    
dower  prescription  begins either as from the time of divorce or from 
 

 
8
        1953 
        July 1 
      ______ 
    AHMED 
  MOULLA 
MOUSTAFA 
         v. 
EMINE ALI 
    OSMAN 
the  death  of  either  spouse  because  a  deferred  dower  becomes  prompt  
either  by  divorce  or  by  death."      This    article    coupled    with   the  
example  given in the text makes it clear that prescription in respect of 
a  claim  for  prompt  dower  starts  from  the day  such  dower  has  been  
stipulated;  because  a  wife  is entitled  to  claim  payment  of  such  dower  
as soon as a contract of marriage has been concluded. According to the 
Ottoman  Law  the  material  time  is  the  date  on  which  a plaintiff  is  
entitled  to  make  a  claim  and  not  the  date  on  which a  demand  for  
payment  is  first  made,  Moreover  under  the Indian  Limitation  of  
Actions  Acts  1853-1875  the  lapse  of six  years  is  the  period  fixed  for  
barring   claims   for   dower-whereas      under      Ottoman      Law   the      
prescribed  period is  15  years. Article 1667 of Medjelle being in force 
by  virtue of  section  49  of  the  Courts  of  Justice  Law,  1935,  until the 
year  1945,  and  the  marriage  contract    under    consideration    having    
been  made  in  1936,  the  cause of  action  in  respect  of  the prompt  
dower  had  accrued  since the year. 
 
 
1936.    The  .period  of  limitation  being  reduced  to  six  years  by  the  
Limitation  of  Actions  Law,  1945,  and  by  virtue  of  special  proviso  in  
the said Law the respondent wife being enabled within two 'years from 
the  date  of  enactment  to  pursue  her  claim  for  dower,  her  right  to  
institute  an  action  for  such  dower  eventually  expired  in  September,  
1947, and it has been lost since that date. 
 
 
 
       The  third  ground  of  the  cross-appeal  turns  on  the  question  of  the  
defendant's  claiming  the  custody  of  two  of  the  children  who  are  just  
over 9 years of age. There was evidence before the trial Court that the 
father was in a position to take care of all the four children and also to 
arrange for their education. There is nothing to support the contention 
that  the  children  or  two  of  them  will  be  happier  or  that  it  would  be  
conducive  to  the  welfare  of  the  children  if  they  were  put  under  the  
custody of the mother, a mother who deserted them without reasonable 
cause. 
 
 
 
       The  judgment  of  the  lower Court  therefore  is  varied  in  the  way  
indicated  above.    That  is  a  decree  of  divorce  to  be  issued  on  the  
grounds of adultery and desertion.  That the respondent be ordered to 
pay £250 as compensation to the appellant; and that the respondent do 
pay full costs to the appellant here and in the Court below. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 