

 
 
1
 [HALLINAN, C.J., AND ZEKIA, J.] 
(March 23, 1955) 
                              SEVGI MOUHAREM of  Nicosia,        Appellant,    
v. 
                               EZEL NAZIM NOURI of Nicosia,     Respondent.     
(Turkish Family Court Appeal No. 1/55) 
 
         1955 
        March 23 
       ______ 
        SEVGİ 
 MOUHAREM 
         v. 
EZEL NAZIM 
       NOURI 
 
 
Turkish  Family  (Marriage  and  Divorce)  Law,  1951,  section  25(c)  –    
Infamous   crime   as   ground   for   divorce   –   What   constitutes   
infamous crime – Prior prosecution unnecessary. 
               Section 25 (c) of the Turkish Family (Marriage and Divorce) 
Law,  1951,  provides  that  "a  spouse  may  obtain  a  divorce  where  
the  other  party  has  committed  an  in-famous  crime  or  has  been  
guilty of such dishonorable conduct as in the opinion of the Court 
renders  life  in  common  impossible  or  intolerable  for  the  party  
suing for divorce." 
             The  respondent,  the  wife  of  the  petitioner,  committed  some 
petty larcenies from shops all within a few hours on the same day. 
The  trial  Court  held  that  the  petitioner  had  established  a  valid  
ground for divorce as his wife had committed an infamous crime, 
and in lieu of divorce granted a judicial separation. 
             Held: The wife's conduct was not "infamous"; decree set aside. 
             (Per  HALLINAN,  C.  j.)  Whether  a  spouse  has  committed  an  
infamous  crime  or  is  guilty  of  dishonorable  conduct,  the  Court  
must  ask  itself  very  much  the  same  question:  has  the  conduct  of  
the  guilty  spouse  been  such  that  the  marriage  relating  cannot  
fairly be expected to continue? 
             (Per ZEKIA, j.) (i) Before a Turkish Family Court determines 
the issue as to whether a spouse has committed an infamous crime 
it  is  not  necessary  that  the  spouse  be  prosecuted  for  such  crime.  
The judge, however, in making a finding about the commission of 
an  alleged  offence  should  see  that  the  nature  and  amount  of  
evidence  adduced  is  strong  enough  to  support  a  conviction  had  
such  an  offence  been  tried  before  a  criminal  court.  {ii)  What  
makes a crime infamous is its being serious in nature and socially 
degrading either to the offender or to his family. 
 
       Appeal allowed. 
________________ 
 
 
        Appeal  by  defendant  from  the  judgment  of  the  Turkish  Family  
Court of Nicosia (Action No. 51/54). 
 

 
 
2
         1955 
        March 23 
       ______ 
        SEVGİ 
 MOUHAREM 
         v. 
EZEL NAZIM 
       NOURI 
 
       A. Hikmet for the appellant. 
       F. Korkut for the respondent.  
   
          The  facts  sufficiently  appear  in  the  judgment  of  this  Court  which  
was delivered by: 
 
       HALLIN AN, C. J.: In this case the respondent sued his wife, the 
appellant,  for  a  divorce.  They  were  married  on  the  13th  July,  1953.  
The  wife  committed  some  petty  larcenies  of  lace  'from  shops  in  
Nicosia,.  all  within  a  few  hours,  on  the  13th  February,  1954.  The  
husband  asked  for  two  alternative  forms  of  relief,  first,  under  section  
19(c)  of  the  Turkish  Family  (Marriage  and  Divorce)  Law,  1951  (No.  
4/1951),  that  the  marriage  be  declared  void  being  induced  by  a  bona 
fide  mistake  and  belief  that  his  wife  possessed  certain  qualities  the.  
absence   of   which   would   make   life   in   common   impossible   or   
intolerable;  and,  secondly,  that  the  Court  grant  the  husband  a  divorce  
under  section  25  (c)  of  that  Law  on  the  ground  that  the  wife  had  
committed an infamous crime. The learned trial Judge refused to make 
a declaration that the marriage was void, but held that the husband had 
established  a  valid  ground  for  divorce;  however,  in  exercise  of  the  
Court's  discretion  under  section  29  of  the  Law,  he  granted  in  lieu  of  
divorce  a  judicial  separation  for  six  months  to  give  the  parties  an  
opportunity of reconciliation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              The  point  which  falls  for  decision  is  whether  the  petty  larcenies  
committed   by   the   wife   on   the   13
th
   February,   1954,   should   be   
considered  infamous  crimes  within  the  meaning  of  that  phrase  in  
section 25 (c) of the Law. That paragraph provides that a spouse may 
obtain  a  divorce  "where  the  other  party  has  committed  an  infamous  
crime  or  has  been  guilty  of  such  dishonourable  conduct  as  in  the  
opinion of the Court renders life in common impossible or intolerable 
for the party suing for divorce".  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        The  syntax  of  this  paragraph  appears  to  allow  divorce  on  two  
separate  but  closely  connected  grounds.  Dishonourable  conduct  is  not  
a ground for divorce unless it makes the life in common impossible or 
intolerable.  This  is  a  question  of  fact  for  the  Court  to  decide  having  
regard  to  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  Where  a  spouse  has  been  
guilty  of  a  crime,  it  would  appear  on  first  reading  the  paragraph  that  
the  Court  should  grant  a  divorce  without  considering  whether  the  life  
in  common  has  become  impossible  or  intolerable,  provided  the  Court  
is satisfied that the crime is "infamous". The attempt of the legislative 
authority   to   draw   a   distinction   between   ‘infamous   crime’   and      
‘dishonourable conduct’ is not very successful, because the legislative 
authority has not defined the phrase ‘infamous  crime’  and  has  thrown  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3
on  the  Court  the  duty  of  saying  in  each  case  whether  the  crime  is  
infamous. 
       In construing a statute one of the cardinal rules of interpretation is 
to look to the scope and objects of the statute. Now the statute before 
us  in  this  case  deals  with  the  law  of  divorce  where  parties  have  
contracted  a  monogamous  marriage,  that  is  to  say,  the  union  of  one  
man  and  one  woman  for  life.  Speaking  broadly,  it  must  be  assumed  
that the legislative authority does not intend to confer upon the Courts 
the  power  to  dissolve  a  marriage  unless  "the  marriage  relation  cannot  
fairly be expected to continue". This very phrase occurs in Article 139 
of the Swiss Civil Code from which our section 25(c) appears to have 
been taken. This article reads:- 
         1955 
        March 23 
       ______ 
        SEVGİ 
 MOUHAREM 
         v. 
EZEL NAZIM 
       NOURI 
 
              "If a married person has committed some dishonourable crime, 
or  if  he  lives  so  dishonourably  that  the  marriage  relation  cannot  
fairly  be  expected  to  continue,  the  innocent  spouse  may  sue  for  
divorce." 
 
 
        No  marriage  could  survive  the  vicissitudes  of  life  unless  each 
spouse gives support and support to the other in time of trouble. It is in 
the interests of society, and indeed is in accordance with the dictates of 
humanity,  that  where  one  spouse  is  in  trouble,  even  where  he  or  she  
has  offended  against  the  laws  of  society,  that  the  spouse  who  is  in  
difficulties  should  before  all  look  to  the  other  spouse  for  comfort  and  
guidance.  It  would  be  contrary  to  humanity  and  destructive  of  the  
institution of marriage  if one spouse could  lightly put away the other 
who  had  offended  against  the  laws  of  society.  The  public  interest  
requires that the righteous spouse should be encouraged to rehabilitate 
his  or  her  fallen  partner  rather  than  that  the  law  should  facilitate  the  
rejection  of  that  partner  at  a  time  when  help  and  comfort  is  most  
needed. Where however the crime is so abominable as permanently to 
injure  emotional  relations  between  the  parties  (such  as  the  crimes  of  
bestiality  and  rape),  then  the  marriage  relation  cannot  clearly  be  
expected   to   continue;   or   where   a   crime   or   a   series   of   crimes   
demonstrate that there is no hope of reform, and the position in society 
of  the  innocent  spouse  and  the  children  of  the  marriage  has  become  
intolerable,  there  again  the  crime  must  be  considered  infamous  and  a  
ground for divorce. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       In practice then when a Court has to construe the phrase 'infamous 
crime' and see whether the phrase in its context can fairly be applied to 
the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  before  the  Court,  in  my  view,  
the Court must ask itself very much the same sort of question as it has 
to ask when considering whether some alleged dishonourable conduct 
is  a  sufficient  ground  for  divorce:  the  crime  or  series  of  crimes  are  
'infamous'  if  the  conduct  of  the  guilty  spouse  has  be  en  such  that  the  
 

 
 
4
         1955 
      March 23 
      ______ 
        SEVGİ 
MOUHAREM 
         v. 
EZEL NAZIM 
       NOURI 
 
marriage  relation  cannot  fairly  be  expected  to  continue.  If  that  is  the  
state of affairs between the parties it is very much the same as saying 
that  their  life  in  common  has  become  impossible  or  intolerable.  It  is  
significant  that  the  corresponding  provision  in  the  German  Code  
(Article  1568)  does  not  attempt  to  make  any  distinction  between  
'dishonourable crime' and 'dishonourable conduct'. It is as follows: 
             "Either spouse may petition for divorce if the other spouse has 
by  any  grave  breach  of  marital  duty  or  by  dishonourable  or  
immoral conduct disturbed the conjugal relation to such an extent 
that the petitioner' cannot be expected to continue the marriage." 
        Applying  the  considerations  which  I  have  mentioned  to  the  facts 
and circumstances of the present case, I do not consider that the petty 
thefts committed by the wife amount to infamous crimes as that phrase 
should  be  construed  in  section  25  (c).  The  decision  of  the  trial  Court  
granting a judicial separation should therefore be set aside. 
       The wife counterclaimed for an order that the husband be required 
to live together with the defendant in the conjugal home. The case must 
in my view be sent back   to   the   trial   Court   to   determine   the 
counterclaim  and  for  that  purpose  to  hear  any  fresh  evidence  which  
the parties or the Court consider it necessary to adduce. 
 
      
      ZEKlA,  J.:  The  points  raised  by  the  appellant  were  two:  In  the  first  
place  it  was  argued  that  there  was  no  evidence  before  the  trial  Court  
and, indeed, no finding by the trial Judge that the thefts committed by 
the wife rendered life in common impossible or intolerable. One of the 
grounds of divorce is given under section 25 (c) of the Turkish Family 
(Marriage and Divorce) Law, 1951, which reads: 
 
              "Where  the  other  party  has  committed  an  infamous  crime  or 
has  been  guilty  of  such  dishonourable  conduct  as,  in  the  opinion  
of the Court, renders life in common impossible or intolerable for 
the part suing for divorce". 
 
 
         It  is  clear,  to  my  mind,  that  the  last  qualifying  words  were 
intended  only  to  describe  the  kin  d  of  dishonourable  conduct  which  
might ht constitute a ground of divorce. This is in line with the Turkish 
Authorities  on  the  subject  (see  pages  62-64  of  Candarly  and  Berki  on  
Divorce). 
 
        The second point raised was whether the Turkish Family Court in 
its capacity as a Divorce Court had powers to investigate and arrive at 
a  finding  about  the  commission  of  an  alleged  crime  before  such  
offence  was  tried  and  proceedings  concluded  in  a  competent  criminal  
court.  Section  25  (c)  just  cited  makes  the  commission  of  an  infamous  
crime  a  ground  of  divorce  and  not  the  conviction  of  such  an  offence.  
This  also  falls  in  line  with  English  and  Turkish  authorities  (see  page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5
120,  Rayden  on  Divorce,  5th  Edition,  under  the  heading  'unnatural  
offences'  as  ground  for  dissolution  of  marriage  or  judicial  separation.  
See also Turkish authority cited above). 
       The   trial   Judge,   however,   in   making   a   finding   about   the 
commission  of  an  alleged  offence  should  see  that  the  nature  and  
amount  of  evidence  adduced  is  strong  enough  to  support  a  conviction  
had such an offence been tried before a criminal court. 
       A    third    point,    although    not    directly    raised,    remains    for 
consideration.  Is  the  commission  of  a  theft  of  any  kind,  whether  of  
trivial nature or not, sufficient to establish a ground for divorce against 
the  guilty  party?  This  depends  on  whether  the  offence  committed  
amount's  to  an  infamous  crime  within  the  object  and  scope  of  the  
Turkish Family (Marriage and Divorce) Law, 1951, in general, and of 
section  25  (c)  of  the  said  Law  in  particular.  There  is  no  hard  and  fast  
rule  dividing  crimes  into  categories  of  infamous  and  non-infamous.  It  
seems  to  me  that  a  certain  class  of  offences  could  and  should  be  
classified  as  infamous  crimes  without  any  hesitation,  such  as,  for  
instance,  the  group  of  offences  described  as  unnatural  offences.  The  
revolting character of such offences leaves no room to doubt about its 
depravity. 
       1955 
      March 23 
      ______ 
        SEVGİ 
MOUHAREM 
         v. 
EZEL NAZIM 
       NOURI 
 
 
        Likewise there are certain classes of offences which one can safely 
describe  as  non-infamous  crimes.  Such  is  the  case,  for  instance,  for  
many statutory offences as distinct from those known to the Common 
Law,  although  the  former  offences  might  entail  severe  punishment.  
Some offences of political character and also minor offences which do 
not involve moral turpitude come within this category. There is, on the 
other hand, a big variety of offences which, as a class, might not fall on 
either  side,  but  each  individual  case  has  to  be  examined  separately.  
Such   are,   for   instance,   offences   for   stealing,   fraud,   forgery,   
embezzlement   and   abortion.   This   kind   of   offence   permits   the   
examination  of  each  individual  case  with  a  view  to  ascertain  its  
degrading  effect.  It  looks  to  me  that  what  infamizes  an  offence  is  its  
being  serious  in  nature  and  socially  degrading  in  character,  degrading  
to the offender and to his family. Many minor offences including petty 
theft   need   not   necessarily   be   considered   as   infamous   crimes.   
Divergence  of  opinion  no  doubt  is  bound  to  occur  among  different  
societies  and  also  among  members  of  the  same  society  as  to  which  
category  a  class  of  offence  belongs  or  whether  a  particular  offence  
could   properly   be   described   as   an   infamous   crime   or   not.   The   
descriptive  word  'infamous'  should  be  interpreted  in  its  popular  sense  
since it has not be en legally defined. 
 
 
 
 
       The  offence  of  stealing  comprises  a  wide  range  of  unlawful  acts  
and it is difficult, and indeed unreasonable, to brand all sorts of thefts 
as  infamous  crimes.  If  a  person  who  picks  up  a  lost  article  on  a  road  
 

 
 
6
       1955 
      March 23 
      ______ 
        SEVGİ 
MOUHAREM 
         v. 
EZEL NAZIM 
       NOURI
 
and  believes  that  with  a  reasonable  effort  he  could  discover  its  owner  
and  restore  it  to  him  fails  to  do  this  and  retains  its  possession  he  
commits  a  theft  but  it  would  be  harsh  and  unreasonable,  according  to  
the  prevailing  moral  standard,  to  consider  such  an  offence  as  an  
infamous crime entailing the dissolution of a marriage. 
              The  learned  trial  Judge  appears  to  have  considered  as  adequate  
ground  for  divorce  the  mere  commission  of  a  theft  regardless  of  its  
nature and its surrounding circumstances. He apparently did not direct 
his  min  d  to  the  nature  and  circumstances  of  the  two  petty  offences  
committed  within  a  start  time,  within  an  hour  or  so,  with  a  view  to  
consider the social degradation affecting the appellant and her family.  
I  am  of  opinion  that  the  commission  of  these  petty  thefts  in  the  
circumstances  of  the  case  did  not  amount  to  the  commission  of  an  
infamous  crime.  Of  course  if  there  is  recurrence  of  such  offences,  
although  trivial  in  nature,  might  indicate  a  habit  on  the  part  of  the  
spouse  in  fault  and  the  Divorce  Judge  is,  in  my  opinion,  entitled  to  
look  at  the  aggregate  effect  of  such  offences  and  consider  it  either  an  
infamous  crime  or,  in  the  alternative,  might  regard  the  repetition  of  
such  petty  thefts,  though  not  infamous  in  character  when  taken  in  
isolation,  amounting  to  a  dishonourable  conduct  which  renders  life  in  
common impossible or intolerable and grant a relief to the complaining 
spouse. 
 
       I  agree  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  and  the  separation  
order  be  set  aside.  The  case  to  be  remitted  to  the  trial  judge  with  a  
view  to  consider  the  counterclaim  and  if  needed  to  hear  further  
evidence   an   the   matter   touching   the   counterclaim   and   decide   
accordingly. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 