

 
 
 [ZEKIA, J. and  ZANNETIDES,J.J.] 
 
                                                  M. SHEFIK HIFZI,                  Appellant, 
v. 
               THE MAYOR, DEPUTY MAYOR, COUNCILLORS 
                         AND TOWNSMEN OF KYRENIA,              Respondent. 
(Criminal Appeal No.2073) 
Street  and  Buildings  Regulations  –Conditions  imposed  in  permit  –Street  
an  Buildings  Regulations  (made  under  Cap  165),  regulation  13,  
proviso to paragraph (3) (c) 
      1956 
     Dec. 29 
        1957 
        Jan .24 
       _______ 
 SHEFIK HIFZI 
              v. 
  THE MAYOR 
          AND 
    OTHERS  OF 
      KYRENIA 
 
Building  –  Balcony  –  Conditions  in  permit  –  Balcony  not  projecting  
beyond   street   alignment   –   Streets   and   Buildings   Regulations,   
regulation 13. 
Construction  of  regulation  –  Proviso  to  regulation  –  Construed  together  
with  main  part  of  regulation  –  Streets  and  Buildings  Regulations,  
regulation 13, proviso to paragraph 3 (c) 
             The   appellant   was, inter   alia,   convicted   of   the   offence   of   
contravening the conditions imposed by the appropriate authority, by 
building  a  balcony  at  a  distance  smaller  than  3  ½  feet  from  the  
boundary   of   the   adjoining   plot,   contrary   to   the   provisions   of   
paragraph  (3)  (c)  of      Regulation  13  of  the  Streets  and  Buildings  
Regulations  (made  under  Cap.  165).  Paragraph  3  (c)  of  Regulations  
13 reads as follows: –  
            “(3)  Where a projection is at a permitted height – 
                    ........................................................ 
             (c)  canopies and balconies, where the width of the street–   
                    (i) does not exceed 18 feet, may project not more than 2 feet; 
                   (ii)  exceeds  18  feet,  but  does  not  exceed  20  feet,  may  project 
not more than 2 ½ feet; 
                   (iii) exceeds 20 feet, may project not more than 3 feet: 
              Provided  always  that  no  canopy  or  balcony  shall  be  at  a  dispute  
smaller than 3 ½ feet from the boundary of any adjoining plot;” 
             Held:  that,  as  a  proviso  qualified  or  limited  a  section    which  it  
followed, and it had to be construed together with the main part of the 
section  to  which  it  was  appended,  the  limitation  imposed  by  the  
proviso to paragraph (3) (c) of  Regulation 13 applied to canopies or 
balconies  projecting  beyond  the  street  alignment;  and  that  since  the  
balcony  erected  by  the  appellant  did  not  project  beyond  a  street  
alignment  ,  the  limitation  imposed  by  the  proviso  was  inapplicable,  
and the conviction must be set aside. 
 
     
        Jennings v. Kelly (1940) A.C. 206, at page 229; and In re Tobrisky Ex 
parte The Board of Thrade (1947) Ch. 565, at page 568, reffered to. 
 

 
 
2
         1956 
        Dec. 29 
          1957 
        Jan.24 
       _______ 
 SHEFIK HIFZI 
              v. 
  THE MAYOR 
          AND 
    OTHERS 
       OF 
  KYRENIA 
       
 
Conviction and sentence est aside. 
(Note: The portion of the judgment which deals with the 
Points referred to in headnote is at pages 4 and 5). 
Cases referred to: 
(1) Jennings v. Kelly (1940) A.c. 206. 
(2) In re Tabrisky Ex parte The Board of Thrade (1947) Ch. 565. 
 
 
Appeal against conviction. 
 
        The  appellant  was  convicted  on  the  1
st
  December,  1956,  at  the  
District Court of Kyrenia (Criminal Case No. 793/54) an three counts, 
of the offence of contravening the conditions prescribed in a building 
permit, and was sentenced by Attalides, D.J., to  pay a fine of £15 on 
each count, and ordered to pull down the offending balcony. 
 
        A.E.E. Reade  with O. Orek for the appellant 
       D.G. Demtriades for the respondents. 
        
       The  fact  sufficiently  appear  in  the  judgment  of  the  Court  which  was  
delivered by: 
 
 
        ZEKIA, J.: The appellant in this case along with other two co-owners 
have  been  convicted  for  certain  alleged  contraventions  of  conditions  
prescribes  in  a  building  permit  issued  by  the  appropriate  authority  of  
Kyrenia,  that  is,  by  the  Municipal  Council  of  Kyrenia  in  respect  of  the  
erection  of  a  balcony  within  the  municipal  limits  of  Kyrenia  town.  They  
have been convicted on three counts: 
 
 
                                 (a) for building a balcony projecting over a street with a height of less 
than 12 feet above the street; 
(b) for building the said balcony with a projection of more than three 
feet over the street; and 
(c) by  building  the  said  balcony  within  a  distance  smaller  than  3  ½  
feet from the boundary of the adjoining plot. 
 
 
        The conditions imposed in the permit were based on Regulation 13 of 
the Streets and Buildings Regulations. Regulation 13 reads as follows:–  
 
 
        “(13.–  (1)  Save  as  provided in  this  regulation,  no  part  of  a  building  
may project beyond the street alignment. 
 
 

 
 
3
                  (2) No projection shall be permitted which is at a height of less 
that  12  feet  above  the  street  and  no  oriel  (commonly  known  as  
kiosk) shall be constructed where the width of the street is less than 
20 feet. 
 
                  (3) Where a projection is at a permitted height–  
                          
(a) cornices may project not more than 2 feet; 
 
(b) lamps, clocks and signs, inclusive of any framework or 
other construction to which or by means of which they 
are attached to the building, may project not more than 
2 feet; 
 
(c) canopies and balconies, where the width of the street –  
 
(i) does  not  exceed  18  feet,  may  project  not  
more than 2 feet; 
(ii) exceeds 18 feet, but does not exceed 20 feet, 
may project not more than 2 ½ feet; 
(iii) exceeds  20  feet,  may  project  not  more  than  
3 feet: 
 
        Provided  always  that  no  canopy  or  balcony 
shall be at a distance smaller than 3 ½ feet from the 
boundary of any adjoining plot;”  
 
      1956 
     Dec. 29 
        1957 
        Jan .24 
       _______ 
 SHEFIK HIFZI 
              v. 
  THE MAYOR 
          AND 
    OTHERS  OF 
      KYRENIA 
 
        It  is  clear  that  count  (1)  is  based  on  regulation  13(2);  count  (2)  on  
Regulation  13  (3)(c)(iii)    and  count  (3)  on  the  proviso  attached  to  
Regulation  13  (3)  (c).  It  is  not  dispute  that  the  width  of  the  balcony  in  
question is over3 feet, that is about 6 feet, and its height from the ground 
underneath  in  parts  less  than  12  feet  and  its  eastern  side  of  the  balcony  
only  1  foot  away  from  the  boundary  of  the  adjoining  plot.  What  is  in  
dispute  is  whether  the  ground  failing  underneath  the  balcony  is  a  street  
within  the  meaning  of  section  2  of  the  Streets  and  Buildings  Regulation  
Law, Cap. 165. The definition of the street in the said Law is given as –  
             “street”   includes any   road,   bridle-path,   pathway,   blind   alley,   
passage, footway, pavement or public square. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       It is obvious that this case stands or falls–at least as far as the two first 
counts   are   concerned–on   one   issue,   namely,   whether   the   balcony   
complained of constitutes a projection beyond the street alignment or not. 
It  was,  therefore,  material  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  ground  falling  
immediately  under  the  said  balcony.  Evidence  was  heard  in  the  Court  
 

 
 
4
       1956 
     Dec. 29 
        1957 
        Jan .24 
       _______ 
 SHEFIK HIFZI 
              v. 
  THE MAYOR 
          AND 
    OTHERS  
         OF 
     KYRENIA
 
below  and  further  evidence  was  allowed  before  this  Court  with  a  view  to  
ascertaining the category of the space projected over by the balcony under 
consideration.  Mr.  Harrop,  the  Director  of  Lands  and  Surveys,  stated  on  
oath  before  us  that  the  balcony  in  question  does  not  project  over  a  street  
and  that  the  space  underneath  the  balcony  can  only  be  described  as  land  
and  does  not  in  any  sense  bear  the  resemblance  of  a  road,  pathway,  etc.  
described  under  the  definition  of  “street”  in  the  relevant  Law.  He  further  
stated  that  there  is  a  cobbled  ramp  which  might  have  the  appearance  of  a  
passage, but that ramp is beyond the space projected over by the balcony. 
The space beneath the balcony–which  is limited to the area between two 
buttresses supporting the wall of the house of the appellants–together with 
the cobbled ramp are Government property and have not been assigned to 
the public. In the light of this evidence it is clear that the Court below was 
wrong  in  its  finding  that  the  balcony  erected  by  the  appellant  was  
projecting  beyond  the  street  alignment  and  was  contravening  conditions  
attached   to   the   permit   which   conditions   were   formulated   on   the   
assumption that the balcony was to overhang a street. We think, therefore, 
that the convictions on count 1 and 2 cannot stand. 
 
                Coming  to  count  3: Can  a conviction on count 3 stand independently 
of the fact that the balcony in question was not projecting over a street? It 
is clear from the evidence that the eastern part of the balcony is only a foot 
away  from  the  boundary  of  an  adjoining  plot  and  it  offends  against  the  
proviso in Regulation 13 (3) (c) cited  above which reads: –  
 
             “Provided always that not canopy or balcony shall be at a distance 
smaller than 3 ½ feet from the boundary of any adjoining plot.” 
 
 
         Can   we   consider   that   this   proviso   can   be   put   into   operation 
independently of the sub-section (c) to which it is attached and which 
sub-section presupposes a canopy or balcony projecting over a street? 
Count 3, no doubt, is based on this proviso and the effect to be given 
to  this  proviso  depends  on  the  construction  to  be  placed  on  it.  A  
proviso  is,  as  a  rule,  in  the  nature  of  an  appendage.  It  has  not  got  a  
separate existence. It qualifies or limits a section or sub-section which 
it follows and it has to be construed together with the main part of the 
section to which it is appended. When this is done one would find no 
difficulty  that  the  limitation  intended  to  be  imposed  by  this  proviso  
was  to  applying  cases  where  canopies  and  balconies  were  created  
with  projections  over  a  street  and  since  in  this  case  the  balcony  
complained of does not project over a street alignment the limitation 
imposed  by  the  proviso  under  consideration  is  rendered  inoperative.  
In Jennings  v.  Kelly  (1940)  A.C.  206,  at  page  229,  Lord  Wright  
dealing with the construction of proviso said: –  
 

 
 
5
              “The   proper   course   is   to   apply   the   board   general   rule   of   
construction, which is that a section or enactment must be construed 
as  a  whole,  each  portion  throwing  light,  if  need  be,  on  the  rest.  I  do  
not think that there is any other rule even in the case of a proviso in 
the   strictest   or   narrowest   sense.   Still   less,   where,   as   here,   the   
introduction  of  the  second  part  by  the  word  “provided”  is  a  strict  
inapt.” 
 
       In  re Tabrisky Ex parte The Board of Trade (1947) Ch. 565, at page 
568, Lord Greene said:– 
 
      1956 
     Dec. 29 
        1957 
        Jan .24 
       _______ 
 SHEFIK HIFZI 
              v. 
  THE MAYOR 
          AND 
    OTHERS  OF 
      KYRENIA 
              “It is common learning that the object of a proviso is to cut down 
or  qualify  something  which  has  gone  before.  The  thing  which  has  
gone  before  is  the  general  power  to  give  a  discharge,  absolute  or  
suspensed,  and  to  impose  conditions  of  the  widest  possible  kind.  It  
would be contrary to the ordinary operation of a proviso to give it an 
effect which would out down those powers beyond what compliance 
with the proviso renders necessary. 
 
             What the proviso does is this. It does not give powers: it qualifies 
powers  already  given  and  provides  that  in  the  exercise  of  those  
powers the court shall be subject to certain limitations...”. 
 
 
        It  is  clear  from  the  authority  last  quoted  that  a  proviso  cannot  be  
interpreted  so  as  to  have  greater  effect  or  scope  than  what  the  foregoing  
enacting part renders necessary. 
 
              We  think,  therefore,  that  a  conviction  based  on  a  proviso  which  is  
dependent  on  a  sub-section  which  pre-supposes  balconies  projecting  over  
a  street,  in  the  absence  of  such  a  projection,  cannot  stand.  For  these  
reasons  the  appeal  is  also  allowed  on  the  last  count.  Conviction  and  
sentence including order of demolition set aside. 
 
Conviction and sentence set aside. 
Demolition order set aside. 
        
  
 
  
 
 