

 
 
 
                                                            [ZEKIA                                                            
AND ZANNETIDES JJ.] 
                                      STAVROS CORNELIOU,               Appellant, 
v. 
                                               THE POLICE,                    Respondents. 
(Criminal Appeal No. 2127). 
___________________ 
 
1957 
Dec. 3 
_______ 
STAVROS 
CORNELIOU 
v. 
THE POLICE 
 
 
Evidence  in,  criminal  cases––Confession-Dispute  as  to  admissibility–    
Right  of  accused  to  give  evidence––Procedure  to  be  followed––
Accused   may   give   evidence   before   or   after   his   witnesses––   
Discretion  of  Court––Criminal  Procedure  Law,  Cap.14,  section,  
72 (1) (d). 
 
 
              On  the  trial  of  the  issue  of  the  voluntaries  of  a  confession  the 
trial  Court  was  not  bound  as  a  matter  of  law  to  follow  the  
procedure   laid   down   in   section   72   (1)   (d)   of   the   Criminal   
Procedure  Law,  Gap.  14;  the  time  at  which  the  evidence  of  the  
accused  himself  was  to  be  received  was  in  the  discretion  of  the  
Court;  and  it  was  open  to  the  Court,  in  the  exercise  of  its  
discretion, to admit the accused to give evidence either before or 
after the evidence of his witnesses. 
 
 
              In the circumstances of this case the Court rightly ruled that if 
the   accused   wanted   to   give   evidence   on   the   issue   of   the   
voluntaries  of  his  confession  he  would  be  admitted  to  do  so  
provided  he  presented  himself  as  the  first  witness  and  before  the  
evidence of his witnesses. 
 
 
        Demetriades v. The Queen (1956) 21 C.L.R. 180; R. v. Lambrou at 
page 96 ante, referred to. 
 
       Appeal dismissed. 
 
 
 Cases referred to : 
       (1) Demetriades v. The Queen (1956) 21 C.L.R. 180. . 
       (2) R. v. Lambrou at page 96 of this volume. 
       (3) R. v. Crippen (1911) 1 K.B. 157. 
       (4) Wright v. Wilcox 9 C.B. 650. 
 
 

 
 
1957 
Dec. 3 
_______ 
STAVROS 
CORNELIOU 
v. 
THE POLICE
 
Appeal against conviction. 
              The  appellant  was  convicted  by  the  Special  Court  at  Nicosia  on  
the  19
th
  September,  1957  (Case  No.  1898/57),  of  the  offence  of  
publishing   seditious   documents,   for   which   he   was   sentenced   by   
Ellison,   Special   Justice,   to   3   years'   imprisonment   and,   also,   of   
possessing seditious documents for which he was sentenced to 3 years' 
imprisonment, the sentences to run concurrently. 
 
 
        M. Triantafyllides for the appellant. 
       H. Gosling for the respondents. 
 
 
        The  facts  of  this  case  sufficiently  appear  in  the  judgment  of  the  
Court which was delivered by : 
 
 
        ZEKIA  J.:  The  appellant with  another  person  were  seen  on  the  
night  of  the  3
rd
    September,  1957,  walking  together  at  Pendayia,  the  
appellant, pushing a bicycle and his companion distributing leaflets by, 
throwing  them  out  on  the  ground  every  3–5  yards.  The  soldiers  who  
concealed themselves in the vicinity shouted to the two persons to halt 
but  they  escaped.  On  the  same  night  the  appellant  and  the  person  
alleged  to  have  been  his  companion  were  arrested  and  taken  to  the  
police  station.  L/Corporal  Penton  picked  up  three  of  these  leaflets  
which have been exhibited in the Court. 
 
 
        The case against the appellant rested (a) on his being identified as 
the person with the bicycle by prosecution witnesses Corporals Roberts 
and   Penton   and   (b)   on   his   confession   made   to   Police   Sergeant   
Lambrou on the day following his arrest. The trial Judge was satisfied 
with the identification of the prisoner but it is conceded on both sides 
that  unless  the  confession  made  by  the  accused  to  Sgt.  Lambrou  was  
accepted  as  evidence  against  the  prisoner  he  could  not  properly  be  
convicted of the offence he has been charged with, because his walking 
beside  the  person  distributing  seditious  leaflets  would  not  by  itself  be  
sufficient to establish his complicity in such a publication. 
 
 
        It  was  not  seriously  contested  an-d,  in  our  view  it  could  not  be  
argued that there was anything wrong with the identification. As to the 
confession   the   submission   made   against   the   admissibility   of   the   
statement to the Sergeant was based mainly on three grounds: (1) The 
learned   Judge   misdirected   himself   as   to   the   onus   of   proof   in   
ascertaining  the  voluntariness  of  a,  confession;  (2)  that  he  refused  to  
allow  the  appellant  to  give  evidence  on  the  issue  of  the  voluntariness  
of the confession and (3) he refused to adjourn the trial with a view to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
enable the defence to call a witness on the issue of the voluntariness of 
the confession. 
 
       The ruling of the Court touching the 1
st
  and the 2
nd
  grounds is as 
follows: 
 
1957 
Dec. 3 
_______ 
STAVROS 
CORNELIOU 
v. 
THE POLICE 
              " I do rule that the Prosecution has shown prima facie that the 
statement was properly taken and the statement voluntary. It was 
proved  in  a  formal  way  as  required  by  all  the  rules  and  persons  
present  at  the  time  if  any  were  available  and  I  think  the  Crown  
has  discharged  the  duty  that  lies  upon  it  to  prove  the  voluntary  
nature of the statement. It is for the defence if they wish to show 
that  the  Crown  evidence  is  untrue  or  not  true  beyond  reasonable  
doubt.  There  is  an  onus  in  my  view  upon  the  defence  at  this  
particular  state  of  the  proceedings.  With  regard  to  the  right;  
claimed by the defence of calling witnesses in any order I would 
like  to  be  referred  to  some  authority  on  that  matter.  I  certainly  
thought it was laid down that in a defence case an accused is the 
first  witness.  It  is  possible,  I  have  not  considered  it,  that  there  is  
some  latitude  in  the  matter,  but,  if  so,  I  would  like  to  know  the  
authority." 
 
 
      This  Court  in Demetriades'  case,  (1956)  21  C.L.R.  180,  and  in  
Lambrou's  case,  at  page  96  of  this  volume,  dealt  at  adequate  length  
with the procedure to be followed when dealing with the voluntariness 
of the confession and the so-called "trial within trial." We do not think 
we can usefully add to the statement of the law made on the subject in 
these two cases. 
 
 
        It is alleged that misdirection in Law exists in the passage quoted 
as  well  as  in  two  other  lengthy  rulings  made  by  the  same  Court  at  a  
later  stage  of  the  proceedings.  Although  we  think  that  the  learned  
Judge was not accurate in some of his statements, specially when taken 
in isolation, appearing in his rulings, nevertheless on the whole he did 
not  misdirect  himself  on  a  point  of  substance.  In  other  words,  it  
appears   to   us   that   the   trial   was   conducted   quite   fairly   and   an   
opportunity  was  given  to  the  prisoner  to  give  evidence  and  to  call  
witnesses at the trial of the issue of the admissibility of the confession. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       The trial Judge thought that the procedure prescribed in section 72 
(1) (d) of the Criminal Procedure Law is applicable in trying the issue 
complained of. N o doubt the Court under section 172 of the Criminal 
Procedure   Law   within   the   compass   of   the   said   law   possesses   
discretionary power to regulate the course of the proceedings at a trial 
 

 
 
1957 
Dec. 3 
_______ 
STAVROS 
CORNELIOU 
v. 
THE POLICE
 
in  any  way  which  appears  to  him  desirable.  He  was,  therefore,  
perfectly entitled to rule that if the prisoner wanted to give evidence on 
the  voluntariness  of  his  confession  he  would  have  been  allowed  to  do  
so  provided  he  presents  himself  as  the  first  witness  after  the  evidence  
on the part of the prosecution closes. 
 
        In Rex v. Crippen, (1911) 1 K;B., 157, the following statement of 
the   Law   by   Wilde,   C.J.   (Wright   v.   Wilcox,   9   C.B.,   650)   was   
commented upon : 
 
 
              "  The  time  at  which  the  evidence  is to be  received must  be  in 
the  discretion  of  the  Judge.  The  exercise  of  that  discretion  being  
subject to the review of the Court." 
 
 
        The second part of the statement, however, was not approved and 
in page 158 it is stated : 
 
 
              "  There  is  no  doubt  the  matter  is  one  in  the  discretion  of  the  
Judge  at  the  trial  who  is  necessarily  in  a  far  better  position  to  
exercise  it  with  much  more  ample  means  of  knowledge  as  to  
whether  the  evidence  can  be  fairly  admitted  or  not  than  in  the  
Court of Criminal Appea1." 
 
 
        Rex  v.  Crippen  deals  with  the  reception  of  rebutting  evidence  but  
as far as the exercise of discretion by the trial Judge is concerned it is 
not irrelevant to the point raised. 
 
 
        After the evidence of the prosecution was heard on the issue of the 
voluntariness  of  the  confession  and  after  Dr.  Diomedes  Issaias  called  
by  the  defence  was  heard,  an  application  was  made  on  behalf  of  the  
prisoner  to  adjourn  the  trial  with  a  view  to  summoning  advocate  Mr.  
Syllouris,  who  was  down  with  influenza  and  could  not  attend  to  give  
evidence on that day. There was no affidavit attached as to the illness 
of the proposed witness and it does not appear that he was subpoenaed. 
Counsel   stated   that   this   witness   visited   the   prisoner   on   the   6th   
September and he might depose as to a complaint made to him by the 
prisoner  in  custody.  But  he  frankly  added  that  he  did  not  know  what  
this  witness  was  going  to  say.  The  trial  Judge  refused  the  application  
for  adjournment  on  the  ground  that  even  if  there  was  a  complaint  to  
this  advocate  by  the  prisoner,  the  latter  did  not  come  forward  to  
support  such  a  complaint  and,  therefore,  he  was  unwilling  to  adjourn  
the   hearing   for   the   purpose   of   calling   this   witness.   In   the   
circumstances, we do not think that he was unjustified in his refusal to 
adjourn the case for fetching such a witness. The appellant in this case 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
was given a chance to give evidence at the trial on the issue of admissi-
bility  of  his  statement  confessing  his  complicity  in  the  offence.  He  
chose not to avail himself of the opportunity. He had a second change, 
if  he  wished,  at  the  close  of  the  case  for  the  prosecution  to  make  a  
sworn  statement  in  which  he  could  go  to  the  circumstances  under  
which he made his statement but he refrained from doing so. 
 
1957 
Dec. 3 
_______ 
STAVROS 
CORNELIOU 
v. 
THE POLICE 
                Although  we  are  in  agreement  with  the  learned  counsel    that  the  
trial  Judge  was  not  bound  on  a  trial  of  the  issue  of  admissibility  of  
confession  as  a  matter  of  law  to  follow  section  72  (1)  (d)  and  it  was  
open  to  him  in  the  exercise  of  his  discretion  to  admit  the  prisoner  to  
give   evidence   after   the   evidence   of   his   witnesses   yet,   in   the   
circumstances of this case, the course adopted ,vas the only reasonable 
one open to the trial Judge. There was no miscarriage of justice and the 
appeal,  therefore,  fails.  We  do  not,  on  the  other  hand,  find  adequate  
reason to interfere with the sentence imposed. 
 
 
        The appeal is, therefore, dismissed. Sentence to run from the date 
of conviction. 
 
 
 
Appeal dismissed 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 