

 
 
1
 
                                                            [ZEKIA                                                            
AND ZANNETIDES JJ.] 
EVRIPIDES G. IOANNIDES AND ANOTHER, 
Appellants, 
AND 
                               RODOTHEA G. IOANNIDES,             Respondent. 
(Civil Appeal No. 4218). 
___________________ 
 
1957 
Oct. 10 
Dec. 31 
_______ 
EVRIPIDES 
G.IOANNIDES 
AND ANOTHER 
v. 
RODOTHEA G. 
IOANNIDES 
 
Water––Water  rights––Transfer  of  water  rights––Water  rights  held  
independent   of   any   spring   or   water   course––Not   subject   to   
registration  prior  to  enactment  of  Immovable  Property  (Tenure,  
Registration and Valuation) Law, Cap. 231. 
 
Immovable  Property––Immovable  Property  (Tenure,  Registration  and  
Valuation) Law, Cap. 231, sections 2 and 39. 
 
 
              In   1914–1915   the   father   of   the   first   appellant   and   the   
respondent   transferred   to   each   of   them,   by   way   of   gift,   
approximately  the  same  area  of  garden  land  which  was  partly  
irrigated  by  water  flowing  from  a  spring  situate  in  another  plot  
and  not  included  in  the  property  of  either  of  the  parties.  Neither  
the  spring  nor  the  plot  on  which  it  existed  was  registered  in  the  
name  of  any  person,  but  the  father  of  the  parties  was  entitled  to  
the use of the water for 48 hours a week. 
 
 
              There  was  no  evidence  of  any  expressed  intention  on  the  part 
of  the  father,  who  died  in  1926,  relating  to  the  use  of  the  water,  
but there was evidence that the parties made use of the water for 
some 40 years uninterruptedly since the transfer of the respective 
gardens  in  their  name,  and  that  the  water  right  in  question  was  
appurtenant to the gardens. 
 
 
              The first appellant claimed that he was entitled to 30 hours per 
week and the respondent to 18 hours per week. 
 
 
              Held:  (1)  that,  prior  to  the  enactment  of  the  Immovable  
Property  (Tenure,  Registration  and  Valuation)  Law,  Cap.  231,  
water  rights,  as  distinct  from  the  ownership  of  the  spring  and  
water  courses,  did  not  require  registration,  and  that  transfer  of  
such rights could be effected without registration ; 
 
 

 
 
2
1957 
Oct. 10 
Dec. 31 
_______ 
EVRIPIDES 
G.IOANNIDES 
AND ANOTHER 
v. 
RODOTHEA G. 
IOANNIDES
 
             (2)  that,  as  the  father  of  the  parties  did  not  reserve  to  himself 
the  right  of  user  of  the  water,  he  was  deemed  to  have  intended  
such right to pass with the lands irrigated by such water, and that 
this right did not form part of his estate when he died in 1926; and 
 
             (3)  that,  in  the  absence  of  any  finding  as  to  the  extent  of  the 
respective rights of the parties, each party was entitled to the use 
of half of the water, i.e.. 24 hours a week. 
 
 
 
       Appeal  allowed.  Judgment  of  trial  Court  set  aside.  Judgment  
entered in above terms. 
 
 
              The  first  appellant transferred  part  of  his  garden  land  to  his  
grandson, the second appellant, after 1946. Water rights were for 
the first time included in the definition of  'immovable property' in 
the  Immovable  Property  (Tenure,  Registration  and  Valuation)  
Law,  Cap.  231,  which  came  into  operation  on  the  1
st
  September,  
1946,  and  by  section  39  of  that  Law  no  transfer  of  immovable  
property  is  valid  unless  such  property  is  registered  and  the  
transfer is effected under the provisions of the Law.  
 
 
              Held:  that  as  the  transfer  was  not  effected  in  accordance  with  
the  provisions  of  section  39  of  the  Immovable  Property  (Tenure,  
Registration  and  Valuation)  Law,  Cap.  231,  it  was  not  a  valid  
transfer,  and  the  second  appellant  had  no  locus standi  in  the  
action. 
 
 
 Cases referred to : 
       (1) Chakarto v. Liono (1954) 20 C.L.R., Part I, 113. 
       (2) Mousa v. Georghi Apostolides and others (1899) 5 G.L.R. 6. 
       (3) Olga  Hji  Louca  v.  Stella  Savvides  (unreported)  (Civil  Appeal  
No. 4122, decided on Mar. 8, 1955). 
 
 
 
Appeal. 
       The appellants appealed against the judgment of the District Court 
of  Limassol  (Zenon  P.D.C.),  dated  7
th
  February,  1957,  (Action  No.  
328/56). 
 
       M. Houry and A. Indianos for the appellants. 
       G. Cacoyannis for the respondent. 
 
 
                The  facts  of  the  case  sufficiently  appear  in  the  judgment  of  the  
Court delivered by : 
 

 
 
3
        ZEKIA  J.:  Appellant–plaintiff  No.    and  respondent–defendant  are  
brother and sister and own adjoining gardens which are partly irrigated 
by water flowing from a spring. The spring is on an independent plot, 
No. 1331, at Prodromos, and is not included in the property of either of 
the  litigants.  The  dispute  relates  to  the  use  of  the  water  coming  from  
this spring. The appellant No. 1 alleges that he is entitled to this water 
for the irrigation of his garden land as from noon of every Saturday till 
sunset of the following Sunday, and that the defendant is entitled to the 
use  of  the  water  of  the  said  spring  as  from  Friday  sunset  till  Saturday  
noon. In other words, plaintiff No. l's claim is for a declaration of right 
to  the  use  of  the  water  in  question  for  30  hours  per  week,  leaving  18  
hours per week to the respondent, in the order described. 
 
1957 
Oct. 10 
Dec. 31 
_______ 
EVRIPIDES 
G.IOANNIDES 
AND ANOTHER 
v. 
RODOTHEA G. 
IOANNIDES
 
        The father of the litigants in 1914-1915 transferred by way of gift 
in  the  name  of  appellant  No.  1  and  respondent  the  properties  partly  
irrigated  by  the  said  spring.  A  brother  of  the  litigants  was  also  given  
land  property  adjacent  to  the  gardens  of  the  litigants  at  the  same  time  
but  from  the  evidence  it  is  cle9Jr  that  the  non-litigant  brother  did  not  
irrigate his property from the above spring at any rate since the time of 
the  transfer.  The  spring  in  question  and  the  plot  on  which  it  exists  is  
not registered in the name of anybody but the use of the water flowing 
from  this  spring  was,  by  a  settlement  reached  in  an  action  before  
Limassol  Court  on  the  10
th
    October,  1915,  between  the  father  of  the  
litigants and the Bishop of Kyrenia, divided as follows : 
 
              " Five days and nights of the said water each week will belong 
exclusively  to  Trikoukia  Monastery  i.e.  on  Monday,  Tuesday,  
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday and the water for two days and 
nights, 48 hours, on Saturday and Sunday, every week will belong 
to Georghios Ioannides and his heirs." 
 
 
        George  Ioannides  is  the  father  of  the  litigants.  This  arrangement 
was  evidently  approved  by  the  Limassol  Court  and  it  was  acted  upon  
since  that  date.  The  said  George  Ioannides  died  in  the  year  1926  and  
there  was  no  evidence  before  the  Court  of  any  expressed  intention  on  
his part relating to the use of the water of the said spring. But there was 
overwhelming evidence that the litigants made use of this water for the 
irrigation   of   part   of   their   garden   lands   for   40   years   or   so   
uninterruptedly  since  the  transfer  in  their  name  of  the  said  gardens.  
The contentious point is as to how many hours each of the litigants is 
entitled to the use of the water. The trial Court as far as the division of 
the water between the appellant and the respondent is concerned found 
that  the  evidence  adduced  was  not  a  reliable  one  although  inclined  to  
believe   in   part   the   defendant.   Its   finding   is   summarised   in   the   
following quoted portion of the judgment : 
 

 
 
4
1957 
Oct. 10 
Dec. 31 
_______ 
EVRIPIDES 
G.IOANNIDES 
AND ANOTHER 
v. 
RODOTHEA G. 
IOANNIDES
 
             "From  the  evidence,  and  the  demeanour  of  the  witnesses 
including  the  litigants,  I  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  plaintiff  
and  the  defendant  were  using  that  water  loosely,  according  to  
their  needs,  and  that  there  was  no  fixed  agreement  between  the  
two. 
 
             I also came to the conclusion that that water was given by the 
late  Georghios  Ioannides  to  his  three  children-the  plaintiff,  the  
defendant   and   Ioannis   Kokkalos,   and   that   the   plaintiff   and   
defendant were using it exclusively, under a licence from the said 
Ioannis Kokkalos." 
 
 
        The view taken of the law applicable to the facts in this particular 
case appears in the fallowing lines of the judgment: 
 
 
              " The legal position as regards the rights over that water is that 
it was the property of the father until his death-that is to say, until 
1926, because the three children to whom, as I have said, I find he 
gifted  the  water,  did  not  possess  and  use  it  for  the  period  of  
prescription,  i.e.  ab  antiquo  under  the  old  Law  and  for  30  years  
under Ch. 231, before the death of their father. The gift was made 
in 1915 and Georghios Ioannides died in 1926, and therefore they 
had  not  acquired  prescriptive  rights  over  that  water  before  the  
death of their father. This being so, I find that the right to use the 
water for the two days of Saturday and Sunday, forms part of the 
estate  of  the  deceased  Georghios  Ioannides,  and  neither  the  
plaintiff  nor  the  defendant  have  acquired  prescriptive  rights  over  
it. 
 
 
              In the case of Chakarto v. Liono, 20 C.L.R., Part I, at p. 113, it 
was ruled that if brothers are o co-owners of land by inheritance, 
and only one is in possession, such possession will not be adverse 
as  against  the  brothers  who  are  not  in  possession,  because  the  
brother  in  possession  is  presumed  to  be  there  with  their  consent.  
This principle was also confirmed in the decision of the Supreme 
Court,  in  Civil  Appea1  4122  Olga  N.  Haji  Loucav.  Stella  N.  
Savvides." 
*
 
 
 
                From  the  evidence  it  is  clear  that  the  litigants  were  the  only  
persons  using  this  water  for  the  irrigation  of  their  property  but  the  
extent  of  land  irrigated  by  each  party  as  well  as  the  number  of  hours  
 
 
 
                                                
 
*
 Unrepoted (decided on Mar. 8, 1955) 

 
 
5
each litigant was entitled for the use of the water flowing from the said 
spring  were  matters  in  dispute.  The  evidence  regarding  these  points  
was conflicting. From the trend of the evidence one might infer that the 
plaintiff-appellant  No.  1  made  greater  use  of  the  water  than  the  
respondent, nevertheless it was a question primarily within the domain 
of the trial Court as to the credit to be given to such evidence and this 
Court  is  not  justified  to  interfere  with  the  finding  of  the  trial  Court,  
namely,  that  it  was  not  satisfied  with  the  evidence  as  to  the  alleged  
division  of  the  water  between  the  litigants.  The  Court,  however,  
refused  to  declare  that  the  parties  to  the  action  are  entitled  equally  to  
the  use  of  the  water  in  question,  because  the  ownership  of  the  spring  
and/or the use of the water of the spring was vested in the estate of the 
deceased  father  and  as  there  were  other  heirs  than  the  litigants  the  
Court thought could go no further than this finding. 
 
1957 
Oct. 10 
Dec. 31 
_______ 
EVRIPIDES 
G.IOANNIDES 
AND ANOTHER 
v. 
RODOTHEA G. 
IOANNIDES
 
        In the first place it is relevant to ascertain the nature of the interest 
of  the  parties  in  the  water  in  question.  The  water  rights–as  distinct  
from  the  ownership  of  the  spring  i.e.  the  land  on  which  the  spring  
emanates and the water courses and channels through which the water 
flows–did   not   constitute   a   subject   for   registration.   In   practice   
sometimes  and  when  the  parties  interested  applied  for  it  such  water  
rights were registered. The nature of a right to use water flowing from 
a spring is incorporeal in character (Mousa v. Georghi Apostolides and 
others, 5 C.L.R. 6 at page 11) and such right was not included either in 
the category of mulk property under the Law of 28 Rejeb, 1291, which 
provided  for  the  registration  of  such  property  or  in  the  definition  of  
immovable  property  under  the  Immovable  Property  Registration  and  
Valuation Law, 1907, and its prototype of 1885. 
 
 
                For  the  first  time,  it  appears,  water  rights  were  included  in  the  
definition  of  immovable  property  by  section  2  of  the  Immovable  
Property (Tenure, Registration and Valuation) Law, Cap. 231, where it 
is  stated  that  the  immovable  property  includes  "(d)  springs,  wells,  
water and water rights whether held together with, or independently of, 
any land ;". As we indicated earlier the land on which the spring exists 
is not registered in the name of the predecessor in title of the litigants. 
The use of the water flowing from that spring was however allotted to 
him, that is the 2/7ths of the water by settlement approved in an action 
by Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              This  right  to  the  use  of  the  water  was  not  registered  and  the  
transfer  of  such  rights  was  not  regulated  by  any  special  law.  It  is  
further  clear  from  the  facts  and  evidence  of  this  case  that  the  water  
flowing from the spring during the 48 hours in the week was not used 
 

 
 
6
1957 
Oct. 10 
Dec. 31 
_______ 
EVRIPIDES 
G.IOANNIDES 
AND ANOTHER 
v. 
RODOTHEA G. 
IOANNIDES
 
independently of the lands irrigated by the parties. In other words, the 
water  right  in  question  was  to  all  appearances  an  appurtenance  to  the  
gardens irrigated by such water. The inference to be drawn in this case 
is  that  such  water  rights-enjoyed  all  along  for  the  irrigation  of  the  
gardens,  or  part  of  them,  gifted  to  the  litigants  by  their  father-were  
intended  to  pass  to  the  transferees  of  the  lands  which  enjoyed  such  
water rights since the date of transfer. It seems to us untenable to hold 
that  the  transferor,  the  father  of  the  litigants,  in  making  a  gift  to  his  
children  of  two  pieces  of  garden  to  which  the  water  rights  were  
appurtenant reserved to himself the right of user of such water and that 
such  right  constituted  part  of  his  estate  when  he  died  in  1926.  In  the  
absence of any intention unequivocally expressed in some way or other 
to reserve such water right to himself, the only reasonable inference to 
be  drawn  is  that  the  father  intended  such  right  to  pass  with  the  lands  
irrigated by such water. Reference is made by the learned President to 
a  record  made  in  the  General  Survey  in  1923  showing  that  a  non-
litigant  brother  has  also  a  share  in  the  water  in  dispute,  but  according  
to  the  evidence  of  Loucas  Fylis,  a  Land  Registry  Clerk,  survey  
documents in 1920 showed that litigants had 1/7th each of the water in 
question. Indeed little reliance could be laid on such conflicting entries 
in  L.R.O.  books  in  the  absence  of  an  explanation  indicating  which  of  
the two is correct. The Court refrained from adjudicating on the claim 
and counterclaim of the parties for the following reason. We quote : 
 
              "This  case  is  fought  between  the  brother  and  sister  who 
derived  title  from  their  father  Georghios  Ioannides  and  by  no  
means  they  are  the  sole  heirs.  The  deceased  left  as  his  heirs  also  
three  daughters  and  one  son  and  indeed  if  the  water  right  in  
question  constituted  part  of  the  estate  of  the  said  deceased  the  
remaining  children  of  the  deceased  are  also  interested  in  this  
controversy." 
 
 
        Under O.9  r. 10 of the Civil Procedure Rules "No cause or matter 
shall  be  defeated  by  reason  of  the  mis-joinder  or  non-joinder  of  the  
parties and the Court may in every cause or matter deal with the matter 
in  controversy  so  far  as  regards  the  rights  and  interests  of  the  parties  
actually  before  it."  The  plaintiff  No.  1's  contention  is  that  the  right  of  
irrigation from the spring at plot 1331 was given to him and his sister 
at  the  time  the  gardens,  irrigated  by  such  water,  were  transferred  in  
their  respective  names.  The  evidence  adduced  in  support  is  strongly  
corroborated by the fact that the water rights in dispute were during the 
lifetime of the transferor, the father, for 12 years and up to this day for 
another  30  years  exclusively  exercised  for  the  irrigation  of  these  two  
gardens. This establishes in our view that the intention of the donor of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7
these properties was at the same time to part also with the water rights 
in question in favour of his said donees. As we said, the registration of 
the  transfer  of  water  was  not  necessary  and  transfer  could  be  effected  
without  registration.  It  was  open  to  the  trial  Judge  to  see  whether  the  
water  right  transferred  was  co-extensive  with  the  area  irrigated  by  the  
transferees of the land and to find also whether there was an agreement 
or a division of the water between parties perfected by prescription or 
if there was an ab antiquo user. The Court from the evidence before it 
was not satisfied to come to a conclusion and indeed it does not clearly 
appear what was the extent of land irrigated by each litigant from this 
spring, and also the number of hours in which the water of this spring 
was  conducted  for  irrigation  to  these  lands  were  not  ascertained.  The  
father has given approximately the same area of garden to each litigant 
irrigable from this water. 
 
1957 
Oct. 10 
Dec. 31 
_______ 
EVRIPIDES 
G.IOANNIDES 
AND ANOTHER 
v. 
RODOTHEA G. 
IOANNIDES
 
        We find therefore that litigants are entitled to a declaration of right 
to the water flowing from the spring in plot No. 1331 at Prodromos as 
follows:  Respondent  is  entitled  to  the  use  of  this  water  for  24  hours  
from sunset on Friday to sunset on Saturday every week and appellant 
No.1 is entitled to the use of this water for 24 hours as from sunset of 
Saturday to sunset of Sunday every week. 
 
 
                The  judgment  of  the  trial  Court  is  set  aside  and  a  judgment  and  
order should be entered as above. 
 
 
        Although plaintiff No.1 failed to obtain the declaration he sought, 
yet  defendant  complicated  the  issue  and  protracted  litigation.  In  the  
circumstances, we think each party should bear its own costs both here 
and in the Court below. The omission of reference to appellant No. 2, 
the successor in title of part of the lands originally gifted to appellant 1 
by  his  father,  is  not  accidental.  From  the  evidence  it  appears  that  
appellant  No.2  is  the  grandson  of  appellant  No.1  and  is  a  minor.  The  
transfer  of  land  in  his  name  by  appellant  No.  1,  the  grandfather,  was  
effected  after  the  year  1946.  Water  rights  as  we  have  already  stated  
were  for  the  first  time  included  in  the  definition  of  "Immovable  
Property"  by  the  Immovable  Property  (Tenure  etc.)  Law  which  came  
into  force  in  1946.  By  section  39  of  the  said  law  no  transfer  of  
immovable property is valid unless such property is registered and the 
transfer  is  also  effected  according  to  the  prescribed  procedure.  This  
was  not  done  in  this  case  and  appellant  No.2  therefore  had  no  locus 
standi in this action. 
 
 
 
Appeal allowed. 
Judgment of trial Court set aside. 
 

 
 
8
   
 
 
 
 
 