

 
 
1
 
                                                            [ZEKIA                                                            
AND ZANNETIDES JJ.] 
 
                                               COSTAS KORALLIS,            Appellant , 
AND 
CLEANTHIS CHRISTOFOROU AND OTHERS, 
                                                                                            Respondents. 
(Civil Appeal No. 4224). 
___________________ 
1957 
June 27, 
Oct.12 
_______ 
COSTAS 
KORALLIS 
v. 
CLEANTHIS 
CHRISTOFOROU 
AND OTHERS 
 
Civil  Procedure––Mode  of  trial––Libel  action-Substantial  damages  
claimed-Proof  of  innuendo––Justification––Who  is  "first  party  "  
under Civil Procedure Rules, Order 33, rule 7. 
 
Practice  ––Ruling  under  Civil  Procedure  Rules,  Order  33,  role  7––    
Whether  appealable––Courts of Justice Law, 1953, section 27. 
 
 
              The   appellant   brought   an   action   for   libel   against   the 
respondents   claiming   substantial   damages.   The   respondents   
admitted  publication  of  the  article  complained  of  but  pleaded  
justification, fair comment and qualified privilege. Proof of some 
Innuendoes rested on the appellant. 
 
 
              Before  any  evidence  was  heard,  the  trial  Court  ruled  that  the 
appellant  (plaintiff)  should  begin  as  the  "  first  party  "  on  whom  
the  burden  of  proof  lay  under  Order  33,  rule  7,  of  the  Civil  
Procedure Rules. The plaintiff appealed. 
 
 
              Held:  that it was in the discretion of the trial Court to regulate 
the proceedings within the compass of the Rules of Court, and to 
make  rulings  on  the  mode  of  trial  ;  and  that  the  trial  Court  had  
exercised its discretion properly in making its ruling. 
 
 
              Quaere:  Whether  a  ruling  made  by  the  trial  Court  could  be  
embodied  in  an  'order  so  as  to  enable  a  litigant  to  appeal  against  
it. A trial Court in conducting the hearing of a case and directing 
the  various  phases  of  trial  usually  had  to  make  a  number  of  
rulings.  To  hold  that  each  of  these  rulings  constituted  a  decision  
within  the  meaning  of  section  27  of  the  Courts  of  Justice  Law,  
1953, and was, therefore, subject to appeal to the Supreme Court, 
would  protract  litigation  unnecessarily  and  encourage  piecemeal  
appeals in one and the same case, which was highly undesirable. 
 
 

 
 
2
1957 
June 27, 
Oct.12 
_______ 
COSTAS 
KORALLIS 
v. 
CLEANTHIS 
CHRISTOFOROU 
AND OTHERS
 
       Appeal dismissed. 
Cases referred to: 
       (1) Beevis v. Dawson (1956) 3 All E.R., 841. 
       (2) Browne v. Murray (1825) Ry. & M. 254; 171 E.R. 1012. 
 
Appeal. 
       The plaintiff appealed against the ruling of the Full District Court 
of Limassol (Zenon P.D.C. and Kacathimis D.J.), dated 21
st
 May, 1957 
(Action No. 944/54), whereby he was called upon to begin as the “first 
party ”. 
 
 
        M. Houry and A. Anastassiades for the appellant. 
       G. Cacoyiannis for the respondent No. 1. 
       G. Chryssafinis, Q.C., and M. Triantafyllides for respondents Nos. 
2 & 3. 
 
 
        The  facts  sufficiently  appear  in  the  judgment  of  the  Court  which  
was delivered by: 
 
 
        ZEKIA  J.: This is an appeal against the ruling of the Full District 
Court  of  Limassol,  which  was  called  upon  by  plaintiff-appellant  to  
make  a  ruling  at  the  inception  of  the  trial,  before  any  evidence  was  
heard,  as  to  which  of  the  parties  the  onus  of  proof  lies  on  so  that  that  
party should open his case. 
 
 
        The  action  relates  to a  publication  which  allegedly  contained  
defamatory  matter  against  the  appellant  and  for  the  publication  of  
which  the  sum  of  £10,000  was  claimed  as  general  damages.  The  
defence did not deny the publication  of  the  articles  complained  of  but  
pleaded   justification,   fair   comment   and   qualified   privilege.   The   
appellant  contends  that  the  publication  in  question  is  libelous  in  
character  and  once  the  publication  has  been  admitted  the  defence  of  
justification, fair comment and qualified privilege has to be established 
by the defendants and, therefore, in accordance with Order 33, r. 7, the 
defendants should be the first party in the proceedings and they should 
open their case and adduce their evidence. The respondents/defendants 
on  the  other  hand  contended  that  this  is  not  the  case  because  (a)  the  
plaintiff in certain paragraphs of his statement of claim, referring to the 
defamatory   character   of   the   publication   in   question,   thought   it   
necessary to add innuendoes to support the allegation that certain parts 
of  the  published  article  bear  a  defamatory  meaning  and  it  is  up  to  the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3
plaintiff  to  prove  his  innuendoes,  and,  (b),  the  plaintiff’s  claim  is  for  
substantial and unliquidated damages and for an injuction and it lies on 
him to prove his right to such remedies once the right to such damages 
and injuction has been disputed. The appellant argues that the essence 
of  the  action  is  not  the  amount  of  damages  and  the"  estimation  of  
general damages is always left to the discretion of the court ; once the 
quality  of  the  libel  is  shown  damages  follow  automatically  and  once  
the profession and social standing of the plaintiff are not disputed there 
remains practically nothing on the part of the plaintiff to prove. To sum 
up  appellant's  submission  is  this:  that  the  main  or  substantial  issue  in  
this case being whether the libel complained of is justified, privileged 
or not the defence should proceed to prove their defence.  
 
       Another  point  which  has  been  raised  by  the  respondents  in  this  
case  is  whether  the  ruling  of  the  trial  court  is  an  appealable  one.  
Plaintiff’s counsel in seeking the ruling addressed the trial court in the 
following terms: 
 
1957 
June 27, 
Oct.12 
_______ 
COSTAS 
KORALLIS 
v. 
CLEANTHIS 
CHRISTOFOROU 
AND OTHERS 
              "So,  Your  Honours, the  position  is  this-it  is  for  you  to  say  on  
whom  the  burden  of  proof  lies  so  that  we  may  apply  the  proper  
procedure laid down by our Rules of Court, as to who is the first 
and who is the second party. 
 
 
              If you will rule that the first party are the defendants, they will 
have to take the position of the plaintiff and we take the position 
of the defendants. 
 
 
              In  other  words,  it  would  be  for  the  defendants.  To  open  their 
case and give, their evidence. 
 
 
             Or,  if  the  Court  rules  otherwise,  they  are  at  liberty  to  say  that 
they  are  not  going  to  adduce  evidence,  in  which  case  we  shall  
have to consider if we are to produce any evidence". 
 
 
        Zenon, P .D.C., intervened and said: 
 
             "  But  in  this  case, Mr.  Houry,  we  feel  that  all  the  allegations  
which are made in para.7 should be proved before the Court". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             "  HOURY:  I  am  not  suggesting  now  that  all  the  innuendoes 
should be proved without the aid of any evidence; a few of them 
require  some  evidence,  but  the  vast  majority  can  be  shown  as  
inferences, without the necessity of any evidence. On that point I 
am quite prepared to take the risk as regards the innuendoes. You 
 

 
 
4
1957 
June 27, 
Oct.12 
_______ 
COSTAS 
KORALLIS 
v. 
CLEANTHIS 
CHRISTOFOROU 
AND OTHERS
 
will  see  that  the  article  is  defamatory,  without  the  aid  of  any  
innuendo ". 
 
       The ruling is ma de in the following words : 
 
             " We feel that in this case the plaintiff should begin his case. if 
he wants to come to the witness box, or call any witness, it is up 
to him but in a libel case, and in this particular case, we are of the 
opinion that the plaintiff should start his own case. He is the first 
party  to  come  before  the  Court,  he  ma  de  a  complaint  and  asked  
for  damages,  and  he  should  start  the  case  as  the  First  Party  in  
these  proceedings.  It  is  not  for  us  to  direct  either  side  as  to  how  
they should conduct their case ". 
 
        After the making of the said ruling counsel of the plaintiff applied 
for  a  formal  order  to  be  drawn  up  as  to  the  said  ruling  regarding  the  
onus of proof so as to enable the plaintiff to appeal from sush an order. 
 
 
        In the first place it is very doubtful whether the ruling made could 
be embodied in an order so as to enable a litigant to appeal against it. 
Indeed  a  trial  Court  in  conducting  the  hearing  of  a  case  and  directing  
the various phases, of trial usually has to make a number of rulings. To 
hold  that  each  of  these  rulings  constitutes  a  decision  within  the  
meaning  of  section  27  of  the  Courts  of  Justice  Law,  1953,  and,  
therefore,   is   subject   to   appeal   to   the   Supreme   Court   would   
unnecessarily  protract  litigation  and  encourage  piecemeal  appeals  in  
one  and  the  same  case,  which,  is  highly  undesirable.  However,  we  
prefer to reserve our opinion on this point considering that the view we 
take on the main point involved in this appeal is sufficient to dispose of 
the  case.  The  relevant  section  of  the  Civil  Procedure  Rules,  namely,  
O.33, r.7, deals in general terms with the party on whom the burden of 
proof lies as having the right to begin and he is called "the first party" 
in the proceedings. It does not deal with cases where the onus of proof 
rests in part on both sides. We have, therefore, by virtue of section 35 
of  the  Courts  of  Justice  Law,  1953,  to  follow  the  practice  and  
procedure obtaining in the courts in England. 
 
 
        In  Vol.  15  of  Halsbury's  Laws  of  England,  3rd  Edition,  p.  271,  
dealing  with  the  burden  of  proof  and  under  the  heading  "  right  to,  
begin " the law and practice are stated as follows: 
 
 
              "In  general  this  question  is  to  be  decided  more  upon  what  
justice  to  the  parties  requires  than  upon  any  strict  rules  of  
practice; though usually the party on whom the onus of proof lies 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5
has the right to begin. An exception occurs where the affirmative 
of  all  the  issues  is  upon  the  defendant  but  the  plaintiff's  claim  is  
for  substantial  and  unliquidated  damages,  in  which  case  the  
plaintiff begins ............................................................ 
        Where both parties allege affirmative issues or where the onus of 
proof  on  so  me  issue  or  issues  is  on  one  party  and  on  another  
issue or issues on the other party, then, if the plaintiff undertakes 
to adduce evidence upon any issue, the onus of proving which is 
upon him, the plaintiff is entitled to begin ". 
 
1957 
June 27, 
Oct.12 
_______ 
COSTAS 
KORALLIS 
v. 
CLEANTHIS 
CHRISTOFOROU 
AND OTHERS 
        We  read  also  from  p. 256  of  Odgers  on  Pleadings  and  practice,  
13th Edition: 
 
 
              "Next  may  arise  the question  as  to  which  side  has  the  right  to  
begin.  This  depends  entirely  on  the  pleadings.  Whenever  the  
plaintiff  claims  unliquidated  damages,  he  has  the  right  to  begin,  
unless  the  defendant  has  expressly  admitted  that  the  plaintiff  is  
prima  facie  entitled  to  recover  the  full  bum  which  he  claims.  If  
the  damages  claimed  be  liquidated,  still,  if  the  defendant  has  in  
his  Defence    traversed  any  material  allegation  which  is  essential  
to  the  plaintiff’s  case,  the  plaintiff  has  the  right  to  begin.  if  one  
issue  be  on  the  plaintiff,  it  does  not  matter  that  there  are  others  
which  lie  on  the  defendant.  But  the  defendant  may  have  made  
admissions in his Defence which entitle him to begin ". 
 
 
        It  has  indeed  been  regarded  as  an  advantage  or  privilege  to  have  
the right to begin in a case. It is unusual for a plaintiff to disclaim such 
a right and insist on a ruling declaring him" the second party " for the 
purposes  of  the  trial.  Surely,  he  has  to  prove  innuendoes  and  he  has  
also to support his claim for substantial damages-even though they are 
general damages in character-and also his right to an injunction. On the 
other  hand,  it  is  a  matter  almost  entirely  in  the  discretion  of  the  trial  
court to regulate within the compass of the Rules of Court the hearing 
of a case and to make rulings touching the mode of trial. 
 
 
        In Beevis  v.  Dawson  (1956)  3  All  E.R.  841,  Singleton,  L.J.,  
dealing with a similar point states the following : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             "I  doubt  whether  there  is  a  hard  and  fast  role  either  way.  The 
authorities  seem  to  me  to  show  that  the  practice  is  based  on  
general  convenience.  It  must  depend  of  course  on  the  issues  
which are raised; obviously it must depend on the pleadings in the 
case in which the issues are set out. if publication is admitted and 
justification  is  set  up  as  a  defence,  the  plaintiff  is  entitled  to  bay  
 

 
 
6
1957 
June 27, 
Oct.12 
_______ 
COSTAS 
KORALLIS 
v. 
CLEANTHIS 
CHRISTOFOROU 
AND OTHERS
 
that  the  onus  on  the  issue  of  justification  is  on  the  defendant.  In  
most cases there are other pleas, and the question arises as to what 
is  the  most  convenient  way  of  dealing  with  the  matter  in  the  
interests  of  justice,  in  the  interests  of  parties,  and  from  the  point  
of  view  of  the  court.  These  interests  are  really  all  the  same.  If,  
after  hearing  submissions,  the  judge  decides  that  one  course  is  
preferable to another, his decision should in general be treated as 
final.  He  will  not  deprive  the  plaintiff  of  the  opportunity  of  
reserving  his  evidence  until  he  has  heard  the  evidence  of  the  
defendant  in  support  of  the  plea  of  justification,  if  he  considers  
that any injustice can be done to the plaintiff by such a ruling ". 
 
        Jenkins,  L.J.,  in  p.  848  of  the  same  case  referred  to  the  judgment  
of .Abbot C.J. in Browne v. Murray and concludes : 
 
 
              "  In  actions  of  this  nature,  the  plaintiff  may,  if  he  thinks  fit 
content  himself  with  proof  of  the  libel,  and  leave  it  to  the  
defendant  to  make  out  his  justification  ;  and  then  the  plaintiff  
may, in reply, rebut the evidence produced by the defendant ". 
 
 
        The Lord Justice continues: 
 
 
              "  Then  the  learned  lord  chief  justice  went  on  to  bay  that  the 
plaintiff   should   not   sever   his   evidence   on   the   issue   of   
justification, leading some of that evidence in presenting his own 
case and some of it in rebuttal of the defendant's case. i think that 
the  principle  there  stated  may  well  reflect  a  practice  which  in  
appropriate circumstances it is right to follow, but is subject to the 
overriding discretion of the court to give such directions as to the 
order in which the onus of proof is to be dealt with and in which 
witnesses   are   to   be   called   as   the   court   may   find   just   and   
convenient in the circumstances of the particular case ". 
 
 
        There  was  no  application  on the  part  of  the  plaintiff  for  allowing  
plaintiff's evidence to be postponed until it became necessary to rebut 
the  case  of  justification  which  might  be  made  out  by  the  defence.  
According  to  the  principle  stated  in  Browne  v.  Murray  the  plaintiff  
might have chosen to take this course but the plaintiff invited the trial 
court  to  rule  that  the  defendants  were  the  first  party  and  that  plaintiff  
was  the  second.  Mr.  Houry  argued  before  this  Court  that  the  court  
below might not allow rebutting evidence to be given by the plaintiff if 
he had declared at the very start of the trial that he has no evidence to 
adduce.   There   is   nothing   to   indicate   that   the   trial   court   would   
necessarily have taken this course. We do not think that we are entitled 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7
to infer that the ruling of the court amounted to a refusal to reserve the 
right to the plaintiff to rebut evidence of justification which might have 
been given against him in the hearing. 
 
       We  do  not  think  that  the court  below  has  erred  in  principle  or  
acted   arbitrarily   in   exercising   its   discretion   to   make   the   ruling   
complained of. 
 
       We  think,  therefore,  that this  appeal  should  be  dismissed  with  
costs. 
 
1957 
June 27, 
Oct.12 
_______ 
COSTAS 
KORALLIS 
v. 
CLEANTHIS 
CHRISTOFOROU 
AND OTHERS 
 
Appeal dismissed. 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 