

 
 
 
                                                            [ZEKIA                                                            
AND ZANNETIDES JJ.] 
 
LAMBRIS HARALAMBOUS PAPA LOIZOU, 
Appellant, 
AND 
KORNELIA THEMISTOKLEOUS, 
Respondent. 
(Civil Appeal No. 4222). 
___________________ 
 
1957 
June 27, 
Oct. 19 
_______ 
LAMBRIS 
HARALAMBOUS 
PAPA LOIZOU 
v. 
KORNELLA 
THEMISTO-
KLEOUS. 
 
Immovable  Property––Mistake  in  Land  Registry  record  ––Prescrip-
tion  Rectification  of  mistake––Application  to  Director  of  Land  
Registration in first instance––Court' s jurisdiction only by way of 
appeal  from  Director's  decision––Immovable  Property  (Tenure,  
Registration  and  Valuation)  Law,  Cap.  231,  Sections  56,  59  and  
75. 
 
 
              The   appellant   originally   applied   to   the   Director   of   Land   
Registration and Surveys to determine the boundaries of his land 
under  the  'provisions  of  section  56  of  the  Immovable  Property  
(Tenure,  Registration  and  Valuation)  Law,  Cap.  231,  and  the  
Director   fixed   the   boundaries   according   to   the   plan.   The   
respondent  did  not  appeal  against  the  Director's  decision  nor  did  
he apply, under section 59 of the La w, for the rectification of any 
title-deed  on  the  ground  of  an  alleged  error  in  the  Land  Registry  
records. 
 
 
              The  appellant  then  brought  an  action  in  the  District  Court 
claiming  an  injunction  restraining  the  respondent  from  inter-
fering with his land, and the respondent filed a counter-claim for 
an  order  directing  the  registration  of  the  land  in  dispute  in  his  
name  and  the  amendment  of  any  previous  registration,  on  the  
ground  that  he  had  acquired  it  by  prescription  and  that  the  Land  
Registry  Office  had,  by  mistake,  failed  to  include  it  in  his  
registration. 
 
 
              The  Magistrate  found  that  the  respondent  did  not  possess  the 
land in dispute for the full prescriptive period and gave judgment 
in  appellant's  favour.  The  President  of  the  District  Court,  on  
appeal, reversed the Magistrate's decision on the ground that there 
was  a  mistake  in  the  Land  Registry  plan,  and  he  ordered  the  
rectification of the respective registrations. 
 

 
 
1957 
June 27, 
Oct. 19 
_______ 
LAMBRIS 
HARALAMBOUS 
PAPA LOIZOU 
v. 
KORNELLA 
THEMISTO-
KLEOUS.
 
             Held: (1) that, when a mistake in the Land Registry records or 
plans  was  alleged,  the  combined  effect  of  sections  75  and  59  of  
the  Immovable  Property  (Tenure,  Registration  and  Valuation)  
Law, Cap. 231, was that the matter should, in the first instance, be 
referred  to  the  Director  of  Land  Registration  and  Surveys  for  his  
decision; and that, unless and until the Director decided one way 
or  the  other,  the  matter  could  not  be  pursued  before  the  District  
Court,  and  then  only  by  way  of  appeal  under  the  provisions  of  
section 75 ; 
 
 
              (2) that neither the Magistrate' nor the President of the District 
Court,  on  appeal,  was  empowered  to  entertain  the  question  of  
mistake  in  the  Land  Registry  records  unless  the  matter  was  
brought  before  the  Court  by  way  of  appeal  from  the  Director's  
decision.  
 
             Decision of the Magistrate restored. 
 
Case referred to: 
 
       Ibrahim v. Suleyman (1953) 19 C.L.R. 237. 
 
 
         Appeal against  the  decision,  dated  15th  March,  1957,  of  the  
President of the District Court of Paphos (Zenon P .D.C.) who reversed 
the Magistrate's decision in Action 
No.102/56.  
 
 
        L. Cleridcs for the appellant. 
       M. Triantafyllidcs for the respondent. 
 
 
        The judgment of the Court was delivered by : 
 
 
        ZEKIA  J.:  This  is  an  appeal  from  the  decision  of  the  learned  
President of the District Court, Paphos, who has given leave to appeal 
to this Court holding the point of law involved to be a very interesting 
one. The subject-matter relates to the ownership of a triangular strip of 
land with 8 feet base and 148 feet long, worth one or two pounds. 
 
 
        The  learned  Magistrate  decided  in  favour  of  the  plaintiff,  finding  
that  the  defendant  herself  did  not,  independently  of  her  transferor,  
possess  the  disputed  portion  for  a  prescriptive  period  until  1.9.1946,  
when  the  Immovable  Property  (Tenure,  Registration  and  Valuation)  
Law,  Cap.  231  cam  e  into  force.  The  learned  President  reversed  the  
decision  of  the  Magistrate  on  the  ground  that  the  real  issue  was  not  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
what had been decided by the Trial Court but it was whether there was 
a mistake on the part of the Land Registration authorities in including 
the disputed portion of land in the plot covered by the title-deed of the 
plaintiff, and, as there was strong evidence indicating a mistake in the 
L.R.O.  books,  the  Trial  Court  ought  to  have  ordered  the  correction  so  
that  the  disputed  land  be  subtracted  from  the  title  of  the  plaintiff  and  
added into that of the defendant. 
 
       The  situation  of  the  'Ohto' between  the  properties  of  the  litigants  
suggested strongly that the strip of land in dispute was being possessed 
all  along  with  the  undisputed  property of the defendant and it appears 
from the evidence that it was likely, taking into account the age of the 
‘Ohto'  that  at  some  time  or  other  an  error  was  committed  in  the  Land  
Registers  which  shows  the  disputed  portion  as  part  of  plaintiff’s  land.  
The  learned  President,  finding  that  there  was  a  mistake  in  the  L.R.O.  
plan  and  relying  on  the  case  of  Sherife  Mustafa  Mulla  Ibrahim  v.  
Mehmed Salih Suleyman (1953) 19 C.L.R. 237, ordered the correction 
to be made so that the disputed portion be excluded from the title-deed 
of the plaintiff and included in that of the defendant. While the learned 
Magistrate,  in  finding  that  prescriptive  title  was  not  acquired  by  the  
defendant, was right, it could not be said that the learned President was 
wrong  either  in  inferring  from  the  evidence  on  the  record  that  there  
was  an  error  in  the  books  of  the  Land  Registration  authorities.  But  
could  the  Court  entertain  such  a  proceeding  or  adjudicate  on  such  an  
issue  without  and  before  the  Director  of  the  Land  Registry  is  called  
upon  to  exercise  his  power  to  correct  his  books  as  provided  under  
section  59  of  the  Immovable  Property  (Tenure,  Registration  and  
Valuation) Law, Cap. 231' Section 59 reads: 
 
1957 
June 27, 
Oct. 19 
_______ 
LAMBRIS 
HARALAMBOUS 
PAPA LOIZOU 
v. 
KORNELLA 
THEMISTO-
KLEOUS. 
              " 59 (1) The Director may correct any error or omission in the 
Land  Register  or  in  any  book  of  the  Land  Registry  Office,  or  in  
any  certificate  of  registration,  and  every  such  Register,  book  or  
certificate  of  registration  so  corrected  shall  have  the  like  validity  
and effect as if such error or omission had not been made. 
 
 
              (2) No amendment shall be made under the provisions of sub-
section  (1)  of  this  section,  unless  thirty  days'  previous  notice  is  
given  by  the  Director  to  any  person  who  might  be  affected  
thereby,  and  any  person  may,  within  the  period  of  thirty  days  
from the date of the giving of such notice, lodge an objection with 
the  Director  who  shall  thereupon  investigate  the  same  and  give  
notice of his decision thereon to the objector." 
 
 
 

 
 
1957 
June 27, 
Oct. 19 
_______ 
LAMBRIS 
HARALAMBOUS 
PAPA LOIZOU 
v. 
KORNELLA 
THEMISTO-
KLEOUS.
 
       Section  7  5  of  the  same  La  w  prohibits  courts  from  entertaining  
any  action  or  proceeding  on  any  matter  in  respect  of  which  the  
Director is empowered to act under the provisions of the said Law. We 
quote section 75: 
 
 
             " 75. .Any person aggrieved by any order, notice or decision of 
the  Director  made,  given  or  taken  under  the  provisions  of  this  
Law may, within thirty days from the date of the communication 
to him of su.ch order, notice or decision, appeal to the Court and 
the  Court  may  make  such  order  thereon  as  may  be  just  but,  save  
by  way  of  appeal  as  provided  in  this  section,  no  Court  shall  
entertain  any  action  or  proceeding  on  any  matter  in  respect  of  
which  the  Director  is  empowered  to  act  under  the  provisions  of  
this Law: 
 
 
              Provided  that  the Court  may,  if  satisfied  that  owing  to  the  
absence  from  the  Colony,  sickness  or  other  reasonable  cause  the  
person aggrieved was prevented from appealing within the period 
of  thirty  days,  extend  the  time  within  which  an  appeal  may  be  
made under such terms and conditions as it may think fit." 
 
 
        The  amendment  or  cancellation  of  a  title-deed  on  the  ground  that  
the  property  or  part  thereof,  covered  by  such  title-deed,    has  been  
acquired on account of undisputed  possession by somebody else than 
the  title  holder  normally    assumes  that  there  is  no  mistake  or  error,  at  
any rate originally, in the registration and in the records of the records 
of  the  Land  Registry  is  contended  the  combined  effect  of  sections  75  
and   59   of   the   Immovable   Property   (Tenure,   Registration   and   
Valuation) Law, Cap. 231, is that such cases in the first instance should 
be referred to the Director of the Land Registry and his decision should 
be  sought.  Unless  and  until  the  Director  decides  one  way  or  the  other  
the  matter  cannot  be  pursued  before  a  Court  of  Law,  and  then  only  
under  section  75  just  quoted.  in  this  case  there  was  an  application  to  
the  L.R.O.  for  fixing  of  boundaries  and  the  L.R.O.  clerk  fixed  the  
boundaries  according  to  the  plan.  The  Director  was  not  told  and  was  
not  required  to  make  any  rectification  or  cancellation  of  title-deed  on  
the  ground  of  an  alleged  error  or  mistake  in  his  books.  The  case  was  
brought  to  the  Court  and  it  was  fought  almost  on  one  issue,  namely,  
whether  the  defendant  was  entitled  to  the  disputed  land  by  virtue  of  
possessing  the  same  for  a  prescriptive period. In our view, neither the 
Trial  Court  nor  the  President  of  the  District  Court,  sitting  as  an  
appellate court, was entitled to go into the issue of mistake in the Land 
Registry  books  unless  the  matter  was  brought  before  them  on  appeal  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
from the decision of the Director. The object of the said Law touching 
this  point,  seems  to  be  twofold:  (a)  The  Land  Registry  Authorities  
should  have  the  opportunity  to  examine  the  case  and,  if  satisfied  that  
there  is  a  mistake  in  their  records,  to  make  the  necessary  correction;  
after  giving  of  course  notice  to  the  party  whose  interests  are  affected.  
(b)  To  avoid  unnecessary  litigation  in  minor  disputes.  In  cases  where  
the   disputed   land   involved   does   not   exceed   1:25   in   value   the   
Magistrate's  decision  on  the  point  is  final  and  not  appealable.  The  
present case, as we said, relates to a property of a value of £1 to £2 and 
if the sole or main object of this litigation was to correct an error in the 
Land  Registers  this  case  could  not  have  gone  beyond  the  Paphos  
Magistrate Court even if the parties were not willing to agree with the 
decision  of  the  Director  whether  an  error  was  made'!  in  the  Land  
Registry books or not. 
 
1957 
June 27, 
Oct. 19 
_______ 
LAMBRIS 
HARALAMBOUS 
PAPA LOIZOU 
v. 
KORNELLA 
THEMISTO-
KLEOUS. 
        For  these  reasons  we  think  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  and  
the  decision  of  the  Magistrate  should  be  restored.  The  costs  of  this  
appeal to be paid by the respondent-defendant. 
 
 
 Appeal allowed. 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 