

 
 
 [ZEKIA, J. and  ZANNETIDES, J.] 
(Nov.  12, 1955) 
                       MICHALAKIS SAVVA KARAOLIDES       Appellant,      
v. 
                                                THE QUEEN                          Respondent. 
(Criminal Appeal No.2016) 
 
         1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
 
Criminal  Law  –  Evidence  of  motive  on  murder  charge  –  Wrongful  
admission of – No miscarriage of justice. 
 
             P .C. Poullis of the Special Branch was shot dead while on duty 
in  Ledra  Street,  Nicosia,  on  20th  August,  1955.  One  of  the  
assailants mounted a bicycle but was intercepted; the cyclist made 
his  escape  but  the  bicycle  was  seized.  It  was  found  to  belong  to  
Karaolides  who  went  into  hiding  for  eight  days  but  Was  arrested  
on  3
rd
  September  having  descended  from  a  motor-car  to  avoid  a  
police road block. In his possession was found a piece of paper on 
which was written: 
                   "I am sending you the bearer of this note and take good care 
of  him.  He  is  a  good  boy  and  a  patriot  to  the  point  of  sacrifice,  
you can trust him. Nobody should know his identity."  (The note 
is signed 'Averoff' ). 
 
             Karaolides was tried for the murder of Poullis and convicted. 
 
             The  Assize  Court  accepted  the  evidence  of  two  eye-witnesses 
for   the   prosecution   who   identified   Karaolides   as   one   of   the   
assailants; it rejected the evidence of one prosecution eye-witness, 
the  evidence  of  four  defence  eye-witnesses  and  the  accused's  own  
evidence and that of his witnesses to an alibi. 
             In  order  to  show  motive  or  to  show  that  this  crime  was  not 
'committed   without   motive,   the   Assize   Court   admitted   the   
following  evidence:  evidence  that  the  "Zedro"  to  which  the  note  
(Exhibit  8)  was  directed  was  one  Afxentiou,  a  terrorist  leader;  
pamphlets  purported  to  be  distributed  by  E.O.K.A.,  the  terrorist  
organization,   and   showing   intent   to   punish   police   officers;   
evidence of attacks on and murders of police officers of the Special 
Branch following the distribution of the pamphlets. 
 
     
              The  defence  objected  to  the  admissibility  of  the  note  signed 
'Averoff' and the evidence as to motive 
 
 
              Upon appeal to the Supreme Court, 
 

 
 
2
           1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
    
             Held: The evidence of attacks on and murders of police officers 
should   not   have   been   admitted   as   such   evidence,   even   if   
technically  admissible  in  order  to  ascertain  motive;  for  it  might  
have  a  prejudicial  effect  which  out-weighed  its  evidential  value.  
However, there had been no miscarriage of justice. 
 
             Upon appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, 
 
              Held:   The   note   signed   'Averoff'   was   admissible,   but   the   
documents  put  in  to  connect  the  appellant  with  terrorist  activities  
and to explain the word "Zedro" wert: inadmissible. 
             But  the  appellant had  not  established  that  there  had  been  a  
miscarriage of justice and the conviction was affirmed. 
             (Their  Lordships  referred  to  the  cases  wherein  the  manner  in  
which  jurisdiction  is  exercised  by  the  Board  of  the  Privy  Council  
has been settled.). 
___________________ 
 
 
 
       The  accused  was  convicted by  the  Assize  Court  (Hallinan,  C.  J.,  
Pierides,  P.  D.  C.  and  Ekrem,  D.  J.)  at  Nicosia  on  the  28th  October,  
1955. 
 
       Summing up in Assize Court by: 
 
 
 
       HALLINAN, C. J.: The accused stands charged with the murder of 
Police  Constable  Poullig  on  the  28th  August.  There  was  a  meeting  of  
the  old  Trade  Unions  in  the  Alhambra  Hall  on  the  morning  of  Sunday  
the 28th August. Among other police on duty there that morning was the 
deceased   Poullis.   At   about   12.20   or   12.25   that   morning   he   was   
surrounded  by  three  assailants  and  one  of  them  shot  him  three  times  
with  a  revolver.  The  ammunition  was  .38.  The  obviously  fatal  wound  
went  through  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  through  the  heart  and  the  left  
lung  and  came  out  somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  left  nipple.  
Poullig  staggered  a  few  paces  as  if  to  attack  his  assailants  and  he  
collapsed outside in the street. At the moment when he was attacked he 
was at the entrance to the Women's Market off Ledra Street which leads 
to  the  Alhambra  Hall,  and  he  collapsed  outside  Michaelides'  shop  
which, as you face the entrance to the Market, is on the left. The shirt of 
the  deceased  shows  that  the  shots  were  fired  at  close  range  so  as  to  
discolour the cloth with powder. 
 
 
 
       It  is  common  ground  for  all the  witnesf!,es  of  the  prosecution  and  
the  defence  who  bore  testimony  on  this  point  that  one  of  the  assailants  
with  a  gun  got  on  to  a  bicycle  and  went  down  Ledra  Street  towards  its  
 
 
 

 
 
3
junction  with  Kykko  Avenue.  There,  one  of  the  Crown  witnesses,  
Christodoulos Michael (witness 5) who had attended the meeting at the 
Alhambra  Hall  and  had  got  down  on  his  bicycle  as  far  as  Kykko  
Avenue, turned back on hearing the shots. He deliberately collided with 
the  assassin  who  was  coming  down  on  his  bi  cycle  with  his  gun  at  the  
corner of Ledra Street and Kykko Avenue, outside the Bank of Athens. 
The  bicycle  ridden  by  the  assassin  was  picked  up  by  P  .C.  Nazim  
(witness 6) and is Exhibit 3 in this Court. It was proved by a partner in 
the  firm  of  Ouzounian  that  that  bicycle  had  the  registered  number  of  a  
bicycle sold to the accused when he was a student at the English School. 
It  was  a  sale  on  credit  and  his  uncle  who  was  a  witness  at"  this  trial,  
Damianos Kamenos (witness 13), was the guarantor. 
 
        1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
 
       So far it has been established that Poullis was murdered and that his 
assailant rode off on a bicycle which is the bi cycle of the accused. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       The  accused  had  been  employed  as  a  clerk  in  the  Income  Tax 
Office  which  is  situated  in  the  quadrangle  of  the  Secretariat.  He  had  
been  at  work  on  Saturday  the  27th  but  he  was  absent  from  work  on  
Monday  the  29
th
  and  has  never  returned  to  work.  On  Saturday  the  3
rd
 
September  there  was  a  road  block.  on  the  road  from  Nicosia  to  
Lefkonico,  at  Chattos.  A  car  with  registered  number  F448  passed  the  
road block and soon afterwards a man was seen walking in the fields not 
far  from  the  police  station.  He  failed  to  come  when  the  police  called  
him, they went after him, and brought him into the station. In answer to 
their questions he gave a false name, a false address, wrong employment 
and  a  false  name  of  the  driver  in  whose  car  he  had  been  driving.  That  
person  was  the  accused.  In  his  clothing  when  searched  was  found  the  
note  Exhibit  8.  It  was  in  Greek,  addressed  to    one  Zedro  and  ran  as  
follows:  "I am sending you the bearer of this note and take good care of 
him. He is a good boy and a patriot to the point of self-sacrifice, you can 
trust  him.  Nobody  should  know  his  identity",  and  the  note  is  signed  
"Averoff".    The  accused  said  that  this  note  had  be  en  given  to  him  to  
convey  to  a  friend.  Not  long  after,  the  car  F448  returned  to  the  road  
block and the driver turned out to be Christoudis, who was a clerk in the 
Archbishopric.  The  finger  print  evidence  given  by  Inspector  Dekatris  
and  P.  C.  Ozesh  who  took  the  photographs  clearly  establishes  that  the  
accused  was  in  that  car.  The  driver  asked  permission  to  go  out  and  get  
the  car  key,  he  went  out,  started  up  the  car  and  has  never  be  en  seen  
since.  The  accused  was  brought  into  Famagusta  and  took  the  attitude  
that  the  police  should  find  out  who  he  was;  and  when  brought  up  to  
Nicosia  he  maintained  the  same  silence.  There  was  no  attempt  to  
establish the alibi which he has sought to establish at this trial. 
 
 

 
 
4
         1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       The prosecution have led evidence to establish that this note found 
in the possession of the accused was to one of the leaders of the terrorist 
organisation  known  as  Eoka.  On  the  night  of  the  3lst  March  last  a  
certain Neofytos Petrou, of Lyssi, lent his car to a man called Afxentiou. 
There   is   evidence   that   this   car   was   afterwards   found   that   night   
containing explosives and also that in a number of places throughout the 
Island  explosions  occurred  which  were  due  to  the  activities  of  Eoka.  
Indeed. a pamphlet found in the car purported to be issued by Eoka and 
declared  its  objects  were  the  liberation  ,of  Cyprus  from  the  English  
yoke, and declaring the intention of the organisation and its members to 
either  kill  or  be  killed.  The  house  of  Afxentiou  was  searched  at  Lyssi,  
and  in  his  clothing  were  found  one  document  headed  "Order"  .and  
another  document  headed  "General  Order"  issued  by  Dighenis,  the  
leader  of  Eoka,  and  directed  to  one  Zedro.  The  prosecution  have  thus  
established that the note which the accused was carrying was directed to 
one  of  the  leaders  of  Eoka.  They  have  also  produced  some  pamphlets  
picked up by the police purporting to be distributed by Eoka, and these 
are  put  in  evidence  in  order  to  show  that  it  was  one  of  the  objects  of  
Eoka  to  punish  police  officers  who  resist  their  activities.    One,  on  the  
5th  April,  which  was  directed  to  the  Cyprus  Police,  said  that  sanctions  
will  apply  to  those  who  resist  Eoka,  and  another  picked  up  on  the  1st  
April,  also  directed  to  the  police,  states  that  whoever  offers  resistance  
against the Cypriot patriots will be executed. Evidence was then led that 
these  were  not  idle  threats  but  were  followed  by  deadly  attacks  on  the  
police. There was an attempt on the life of a policeman called Aspros on 
the  1st  July.  Another  attempt  to  murder  the  victim  in  the  present  case,  
Poullis,  on  the  13
th
    July.  Again  a  .38  bullet  was  usede  On  the  l0th  
August special constable Zavros was murdered. He had three brothers in 
the  police,  one  of  them'  in  the Special Branch; and on the 11
th
  August 
Police  Sergeant  Costopoulos  was  murdered.  All  these  attacks  were  
made on members of' the Special Branch. The Crown have also put in a 
pamphlet, picked up in the Ayios Antonios quarter of Nicosia on the 5
th
  
September.  This  purports  to  be  issued  by  Eoka  and  to  state  that  those  
policemen who have been murdered were justly murdered as traitors. In 
our  view  the  evidence  that  it  was  an  object  of  Eoka  to  threaten  and  to  
execute   these   threats   against   members   of   the   Special   Branch   is   
established by the first two pamphlets that I have mentioned which were 
picked  up  by  the  police,  and  the  attacks  on  the  policemen  and  their  
killing.  To establish the fact that Eoka openly admits after these crimes, 
having  done  them,  would,  in  our  view,  require  stronger  evidence  than  
the production of this pamphlet found at Ayios Antonios quarter on the 
5
th
  September.  We  therefore  disregard  Exhibit  17  for  the  purposes  of  
this case. 
 
 

 
 
5
 
  
      So  far  as  I  have  gone  there  has  be  en  no  appreciable  conflict  
between  the  case  for  the  prosecution  and  the  case  for  the  defence.  
Poullig is murdered, the assailant runs off on the accused's bicycle, and 
the  events  that  occurred  at  Chattos  are  not  seriously  in  issue.  The  
conflict  of  evidence  is  limited  to  whether  on  the  one  hand  the  eye-
witnesses  produced  by  the  Crown  are  to  be  believed,  or  that  we  are  to  
accept the evidence of the accused explaining how the bicycle got out of 
his  possession  into  the  hands  of  the  assailant  and  the  evidence  that  he  
has given us as to his alibi. 
 
           
           1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
 
       The Crown produced three eye-witnesses, one man named Hussein 
Mehmet  Djenkiz,  a  motor  car  driver,  the  other  a  clerk  named  Feizi  
Hussein Derekoglou and lastly a Police Constalıle, Mehmet Ismail. The 
defence  produced  several  witnesses  to  discredit  Djenkiz,  but  even  
without that evidence on his demeanour in the box, this Court had come 
to the conclusion that we were not able to rely on his evidence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      The evidence of Derekoglou and of Ismail is a very different matter. 
Derekoglou was going for a walk in Ledra Street at about 12.20 and he 
had got to somewhere near the shop of' Boxalian, which is further down 
Ledra  Street  from  the  entrance  to  the  Women'  s  Market  on  the  same  
side, opposite the Bank of Athens. He saw a man take a bicycle from the 
payment  near  the  Keo  Offices  at  the  corner  of  Ledra  Street  and  Liberti  
Street, he had a revolver in his hand and was putting it into his shirt. The 
man got on the bicycle, this, I must say, was after the witness heard the 
shots  being  fired;  he  saw  the  collision  between  the  two  bicycles  which  
was  at  the  corner  of  the  street  where  he  happened  to  be,  and  he  was  
himself, I may say, a special constable as well as a clerk, and he chased 
the man with the gun who had been knocked off the bicycle by Kykko 
Avenue  in  the  direction  of  Phaneromeni  Street.  He,  the  witness,  who  
was on his bicycle, passed other pursuers round Phaneromeni Street and 
up  Kykko  Avenue,  the  fugitive  looked  back  and  he  saw  his  face  again  
somewhere round Phaneromeni Street, and again at point 9 on the plan 
(which  is  put  in),  the  fugitive  again  turned  and  threatened  the  witness  
with a revolver. Finally the fugitive turned down a side street to the left 
into Hermes Street, and he lost sight of him. 
 
       Police  Constable  Ismail  was on  duty  outside  the  Alhambra  Hall  at  
the time of the shooting; and immediately after the shots he actually saw 
the assailant. He did not see the gun but he saw the smoke coming out 
from under his armpit; and then he saw the assailant take a bicycle from 
near  Keo  offices  and  proceed  down  Ledra  Street.  He  saw  the  collision  
and  he  chased  the  fugitive  up  to  Phaneromeni  Street  where  he,  the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           

 
 
6
         1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
 
 
witness,  got  on  a  bicycle  and  continued  until  again,  like  the  clerk  
Derekoglou, he lost sight of him.  
 
We have considered slight discrepancies in the evidence between these 
two  witnesses  and  such  slight  discrepancies  between  Derekoglou's  
statement as to the accused taking a pistol out of his pocket or out of his 
shirt,  discrepancies  between  the  depositions  and  the  evidence  here,  but  
we  do  not  consider  that  their  evidence  has  be  en  shaken  in  the  cross-
examination.  Their  evidence  is  to  some  extent  corroborated  by  the  
evidence  of  Christodoulos  Michael,  the  man  who  threw  his  bicycle  in  
the  way  of  the  assailant.  The  two  witnesses,  Derekoglou  and  Ismail,  
have  no  doubt  that  the  man  they  saw  and  the  man  they  chased  is  the  
accused.  Christodoulos  Michael  certainly  showed  courage  in  throwing  
his bicycle in the way, but it is extraordinary that although he must have 
seen  the  assailant  of  Poullis  who  was  on  that  bi  cycle  when  they  
collided,  and  although  he  chased  him  up  Kykko  Avenue  and  the  man  
turned  round  and  he  saw  his  face  again,  he  says  that  he  is  unable  to  
identify that man as the accused. He had said to the police and said here 
that the man was about the same height as himself, 5’ 7½”, that he was 
slim,  that  he  had  a  light  coloured  shirt,  and  that  he  was  about  25.  One  
could   understand   Christodoulos   coming   here   and   saying   that   the   
accused  is  not  the  man  who  was  on  the  bicycle,  but  it  is  difficult  to  
believe him when he says he does not know whether the accused is the 
man  he  saw  or  not.  However,  his  description  does  tally  with  the  
description of the accused. 
 
 
              The  defence  have  called  three  witnesses  who  purport  to  be  eye-
witnesses and who bay that the man in the dock is not the man who shot 
Poullis and who was pursued down Ledra Street and up Kykko Avenue. 
The first was Haritonides, who is the owner of the kiosk at the entrance 
to  the  Women's  Market.  This  man  saw  three  people  come  out  of  the  
Alhambra  Hall,  and  he  also  saw  the  deceased  Poullig  close  by  the  
witness's  kiosk:  Then  he  heard  the  shots  and  he  saw  the  three  people  
going  away  with  their  backs  to  him.  Now,  when  he  saw  them  coming  
out of the Alhambra Hall, there does not seem to be any reason why he 
should have particularly noted their appearance no more than the many 
hundred people who had come out of there also, and after the shots were 
fired  he  never  saw  their  faces  again.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  this  man  
can come into Court and swear positively that none of these three men is 
the accused in the dock. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
    
       The next witness was a schoolteacher called Myrianthopoullos, who 
said he was sitting at the material time in a cafe opposite the entrance to 
the  Women's  Market.  He  heard  the  shots  but  did  not  realise  that  
 
 
 
 

 
 
7
anybody  had  been  shot.    And  he  said  he  saw  the  three  people  walking  
away  hurriedly  for  more  than  two  seconds.  He  did  not  see  anything  in  
any of their hands. He never gave any description of these people to the 
police,  but  on  seeing  a  photograph  of  the  accused  in  the  paper  he  
declared that none of the three people that he had seen were the accused. 
He  did  not  relate  what  he  did  after  the  shooting;  for  all  we  know  he  
continued  to  sip  his  coffee.  We  got  the  impression  that  this  school  
teacher is not without bias against the Crown, he told us that he and his 
father were ardent nationalists, and that even if he were in a position to 
give evidence for the Crown on an offence by terrorists he would not do 
so.  We  were  left  in  some  doubt  as  to  whether  this  was  through  fear  or  
through bias or through both. But at this critical stage when forces of the 
Crown are trying to restore law and order it seems a pity that this sort of 
man should be directing youth. 
 
         1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
 
       The third witness called by the defence on this part of the case was 
Hallis.  He  is  a  young  fellow  of  18  and  if  a  man  can  be  judged  by  
appearance  and  demeanour  we  would  put  him  in  a  low  category.  The  
type  that  belongs  to  the  riff-raff  of  a  big  town.  He  said  that  he  was  
attending  the  meeting  at  the  Alhambra  as  an  old  trade-unionist,  and  he  
was about 30 paces from the Bank of Athens in Kykko Avenue. He saw 
the collision of the two bicycles and he heard the shots. He understood 
that somebody had thrown a bomb. He gave chase to the man who had 
got off the bicycle and was running up Kykko Avenue, and although he 
had no bicycle he alleges that he was out in front of everybody. He said 
that the fugitive had no pistol and that he was wearing a yellowish shirt, 
which  certainly  does  not  correspond  with  the  other  evidence.  It  would  
appear  that  after  being  some  hours  in  the  police  station  waiting  for  his  
statement to be taken, and possibly having heard that the murdered man 
was not an old trade-unionist but a policeman, he seems to have lost his 
ability to identify the assailant. 
 
 
 
              At  any  rate,  after  the  arrest  of  the  accused  on  the  4
th
    September  
there  was  an  identification  parade  held  in  Nicosia  and  the  accused  was  
identified  by  witness  Derekoglou  and  witness  Ismail;  but  Hallis,  who  
was also at the parade, was unable to identify him. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       We now come to the accused's own story. He said that he was living 
at  that  time  in  a  room  in  Strovolos  with  his  two  sisters,  but  on  Sunday  
the  28
th
    August  his  two  sisters  were  up  at  their  village,  Palechori.  He  
got up on that morning and on going out met his brother-in-law, a man 
called  Phidias,  and  they  both  went  off  to  a  coffee-shop  in  Strovolos  
called "Votsis" run by a man called Costas. About II o'clock, or perhaps 
a  little  earlier,  Phidias  had  gone  off  to  this  meeting  of  the  old  Trade  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
8
           1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
Unions  at  the  Alhambra  Hall  and  in  doing  so  he  had  borrowed  the  
accused's  bicycle.  The  accused  then  went  off  on  his  sister's  bicycle  to  
the house of his uncle Damianos who lives at Cadmus Street somewhere 
near  the  Acropole  Hotel.  There  he  had  joined  Damianos,  his  wife  and  
two  daughters  in  a  room  where  they  were  listening  to  the  radio  up  to  
about noon. When the current of the radio failed they moved out into an 
adjoining yard under the shade of a mulberry tree, and there they joined 
two  neighbours  called  Cherkezos,  father  and  son.  The  elder  Cherkezos  
had  rented  a  house  from  Damianos.  The  accused  played  a  game  of  
draughts  with  the  young  Cherkezos,  and  somewhere  about  one  o'clock  
Damianos'  assistant,  a  grocer  boy  called  Arghyros,  arrived  from  town,  
and he told them that he had heard that a policeman had been murdered. 
About  a  quarter  of  an  hour  later  the  accused's  brother-in-law  Phidias  
arrived.  He  took  the  accused  aside  and  told  him  that  on  coming  out  of  
the Alhambra Hall a policeman had been shot, and one of the assailants 
had  stolen  the  accused's  bicycle  which  Phidias  had  left  outside  in  the  
street. The accused said he was very disturbed at this news and went and 
told Damianos that he would not stay to lunch and went off. He told the 
Court  that  he  feared  the  police  would  associate  him  in  this  crime  not  
only  because  of  his  bicycle  but  also  because  of  the  fact  that  there  had  
been  an  explosion  probably  due  to  Eoka  in  the  Income  Tax  office  last  
July.  He  then  went  back  to  his  house  at  Strovolos  where  he  left  his  
sister's  bicycle  and  then  proceeded  to  the  house  of  a  friend  whose  
identity he refuses to disclose. There he remained concealed until on the 
3
rd
    September  he  got  into  the  car  which  took  him  down  to  Chattos,  
where  he  was  picked  up  by  the  police.  He  told  the  Court  that  this  note  
directed  to  Zedro  had  been  given  to  him  by  this  friend,  and  his  
instructions  were  that  when  he  met  a  man  in  a  blue  shirt  after  an  
exchange of certain passwords he was to deliver this note. 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
       Now, his evidence falls into two parts, on8, his explanation of why 
his  bicycle  was  being  ridden  by  Poullis'  assailant  and  the  second  an  
alibi. But both parts of his defence are closely bound up together. For, if 
we are unable to accept the story of the bicycle it will be fatal of course 
to  the  alibi.  Now,  he  called  as  witnesses  for  the  alibi  his  uncle  
Damianos, the two Cherkezos and the boy Arghyros. Damianos appears 
to  have  told  the  police  on  the  29
th
    that  the  accused  had  been  in  his  
house  the  previous  morning,  and  when  he  was  called  to  the  police  
station  on  the  8th  September  he  also  made  a  statement  to  the  police  
about the accused coming to his house, listening to the radio and being 
there  at  the  material  time  when  Poullig  was  murdered.  The  Police  had  
on  the  8
th
  September  called  Damianos  evidently  to  take  a  statement  
concerning  the  bicycle  for  which  Damianos  had  been  guarantor,  but  
they   did   not   record   the   statement   he   made   as   to   the   accused's   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
9
movements on the morning of the 28
th
 August. This, in the view of the 
Court, should have been recorded, and for whatever reason a witness is 
called  to  make  a  statement,  if  he  makes  a  statement  voluntarily  which  
amounts to an alibi for an accused person, it should be recorded. 
 
The   two   Cherkezos   and   also   the   boy   Arghyros   have   come   and   
corroborated the story of the accused and of Damianos. 
 
         1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
 
 
 
       It is very difficult to test the verocity of an alibi of this kind, but it is 
very  of  ten  on  a  small  matter  that  the  weakness  of  an  alibi  might  be  
revealed.  The  young  Cherkezos  said  that  he  usually  played  draughts  
with the accused, but that, before Sunday 28
th
 August, he had not played 
draughts  with  the  accused  for  a  long  time;  he  had  only  played  once  or  
twice since the accused had gone to Stroyolos a year ago. Yet Arghyros 
told  us  that  the  accused  and  young  Cherkezos  had  had  a  game  of  
draughts  on  the.  Sunday  previous  to  the  28
th
  August.the  cafe-keeper  
Costas was called also to corroborate the giving of the bicycle from the 
accused to Phidias, and finally Phidias himself was called to testify what 
had happened to the bicycle. His story to the Court is frankly incredible. 
He  said  that  he  attended  the  meeting  at  the  Alhambra  and  left  the  
bicycle  on  the  payement  a  little  further  down  the  street  from  the  
entrance  to  the  Women's  Market  on  the  same  side,  and  he  heard  the  
shots  and  saw  people  crowding  round  the  victim.  He  saw  three  people  
running and one took his bicycle and rode off with it. Now, he said that 
he  was  on  the  edge  of  the  crowd  that  was  round  the  victim,  and  that  
about 10 minutes after watching the crowd he saw the man run off with 
his  bicycle.  Well  now,  even  if  he  has  a  very  poor  idea  of  time  and  we  
reduce the ten minutes to one, it still does not make sense with the rest 
of the evidence. He says that although he was a few feet from the man 
who  was  running  away  with  his  bicycle  he  made  no  effort  to  stop  him  
nor  did  he  invite  any  of  the  numerous  people  round  him  to  assist  him.    
Nor  can  we  understand  why  when  he  got  back  to  Damianos'  house  he  
should take the accused aside and tell him in secret what had occurred; 
he  was  among  friends  and  relatives  and  the  sooner  that  they  heard  the  
true explanation of how he lost the bicycle the better. 
 
 
 
       So  that  we  have  to  consider  who  is  telling  the  truth:  the  eye-
witnesses for the Crown, Derekoglou and P.C. Ismail, on the one hand, 
who positively identified the accused, or to believe the story that he was 
not  there  at  all,  that  some  other  person  stole  the  bicycle  from  Phidias  
while  the  accused  was  in  the  house  of  Damianos.  We  have  to  consider  
on  the  one  hand  the  manner  in  which  these  two  eye-witnesses  have  
given  their  evidence  and  their  demeanour,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  
incredible evidence given by Phidias. 
 

 
 
10
           1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
       We  have  the  incontrovertible  evidence  that  the  man  who  shot  
Poullis  was  the  man  on  the  bicycle  of  the  accused.  We  have  it  that  the  
accused  disappeared  immediately  after  the  crime,  we  have  it  that  
everything points to this crime having been planned and ordered by the 
terrorist  organisation  known  as  Eoka,  and  we  have  it  that  the  accused  
when  he  disappears  after  some  days  of  hiding  goes  off  in  a  motor  car  
with a note to one of the leaders of Eoka. 
 
 
 
              It  has  been  put  forward  by  his  counsel  that  Eoka  would  manage  
things  better  than  to  let  him  fide  on  such  a  fateful  undertaking  on  his  
own  bicycle,  but  we  must  remember  that  but  for  a  failure  of  nerve  on  
behalf  of  the  accused  when  he  got  to  Chattos  he  would  have  escaped.  
Only  for  his  own  failure  of  nerve  the  organisation  would  have  saved  
him.  He  was  unfortunate  to  have  found  so  resolute  an  eye-witness  as  
Derekoglou and Ismail, but nevertheless he got away. 
 
 
 
       Having  regard  to  the  evidence  against  him,  which  is  not  seriously  
challenged  by  the  defence,  and.  the  evidence  of  the  eye-witnesses  
Derekoglou  and  Ismail,  which  we  accept,  we  must  reject  his  evidence  
and his alibi. 
 
       He  has  be  en  very  ably  defended  by  counsel,  who  have  behaved  
with  great  decorum  and  zeal  throughout  the  trial.  But,  in  our  view,  the  
Crown with great ability have presented a case that leaves no reasonable 
doubt  in  our  minds  that  he  is  guilty  of  the  offence  with  which  he  is  
charged. 
 
We fnd him guilty of murder. 
___________________ 
 
           
 
       Appeal  by  the  accused  from  the  judgment  of  the  Assize  Court  of  
Nicosia (Case No. 12290/55). 
        Stelios Paylides, Q. C., George N. Chryssafinis, Q. C., 
       A. Indianos,  E. Emilianides, Glaicos Clerides and  C. 
       Phanos for the appellant. 
       R. R. Denktash, Acting Solicitor-General, for the respondent. 
       The judgment of the Supreme Court was delivered by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              ZERlA,  J.:  This  is  an  appeal  against  the  verdict  of  the  Special  
Assize  Court  of  Nicosia  by  which  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  the  
murder  of  Police  Constable  Herodotos  Michael  Poullig  on  the  28
th
 
August last in Nicosia. The old Trade Unions were holding a meeting in 
the Alhambra Hall, which has its entrance on Ledra Street, Nicosia, on 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
11
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
the  morning  of  the  28
th
  August.  Deceased  Poullis  with  some  other  
policemen were on duty at this meeting. Next to the Hall is the women's 
bazaar, the market. The entrances of the Hall and of the market are close 
to  each  other  and  people  may  walk  in  or  out  of  the  Hall  and  market  
through either entrances. Towards noon the meeting came to an end and 
people started to disperse. After the greater part of the people attending 
the  meeting  had  left  the  Hall  and  went  away,  sometime  between  12.20  
and  12.30  p.m.,  three  persons  surrounded  Poullis  who  at  the  time  was  
standing  in  the  entrance  of  the  women's  bazaar.  One  of  the  three  shot  
him, the deceased, with a revolver from close quarters three times. The 
victim made a few paces towards the street and collapsed. His death was 
caused  by  a  bullet  .38  which  penetrated  his  heart  and  lung.  The  three  
persons  encircling  the  victim  ran  away  from  the  scene  of  the  crime  
down  Ledra  Street.  One  of  the  assailants  with  a  revolver  got  on  a  
bicycle  which  he  took  from  the  payement  opposite  the  KEO  offices  
from a point 55 feet away from the scene of the crime, and rode down in 
the  same  street  towards  its  junction  with  Kykko  avenue.  A  certain  
Christodoulos  Michael,  a  Crown  witness,  with  a  view  to  stop  the  
fugitive  threw  his  bicycle  across  the  road  in  front  of  him.  The  fugitive  
on his bicycle collided with the bicycle on the ground and as a result he 
came  down  of  his  bicycle  and  abandoned  it  there  at  a  point  near  the  
corner of Ledra Street and Kykko avenue, 205 feet away from the scene. 
The  assailant  was  then  seen  running  away  all  along  the  Kykko  avenue  
for  a  distance  over  150  yards  chased  by  a  number  of  people  including  
the eye-witnesses who gave testimony as to the identity of this fugitive 
who  eventually  succeeded  to  escape  after  taking  another  street,  namely  
Hermes Street. 
 
       The bicycle which was abandoned at the place of the collision was 
later picked up by Police Constable Nazim and it was established that it 
belonged  to  the  appellant  who  was  making  use  of  it  for  the  last  two  or  
three years. 
 
         1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       There  appears  to  be  a  common  ground  and  at  any  rate  established  
beyond  any  doubt  that  the  person  who  rode  off  from  the  scene  of  the  
crime  down  Ledra  Street  and  was  forced  to  abandon  his  bicycle  at  a  
point  we  have  just  described  and  continued  the  flight  all  along'  Kykko  
avenue was the principal felon who committed the murder. The identity 
of  this  person  formed  therefore  the  only  crucial  point  in  this  case.  The  
trial Court in ascertaining the identity of the murderers had before them 
both  direct  and  circumstantial  evidence.  They  had  two  eye-witnesses  
who recognised and identified the appellant as the person escaping from 
the  scene  of  the  crime  on  the  bicycle  soon  after  the  murder.  One  of  
them,  P  .C.  Mehmed  Ismael,  witnessed  the  actual  commission  of  the  
 

 
 
12
           1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
offence.  The  trial  Court  accepted  the  evidence  of  both  these  witnesses.  
In  addition  the  Court  had  the  bicycle  which  the  assassin  rode  off  from  
the scene of the crime in order to escape immediately after the murder. 
It belonged to the appellant. This was not disputed. The trial Court had 
also  the  peculiar  conduct  of  the  appellant  after  the  crime  which  was  
taken  into  account.  The  appellant  disappeared  immediately  after  the  
crime. Although a clerk employed in the Income Tax Office he did not 
turn up for duty on Monday following the day of the offence. He did not 
return  to  his  office  since.  He  concealed  himself  as  he  alleged  in  the  
house  of  a  friend,  whose  identity  he  did  not  wish  to  disclose,  until  the  
3
rd
  September  when  in  a  friend's  car  that  day  endeavoured  to  reach  
Lefkonico  for  asylum.  On  their  way  to  Lefkonico  near  the  village  of  
Chattos  from  a  distance  they  noticed  a  road-block  which  they  had  to  
clear. Appellant, afraid of the detection of his identity at the road-block 
by  the  policemen  who  checked  the  vehicles  and  passengers,  alighted  
from   the   car.   His   friend,   the   driver,   proceeded   on   to   Lefkonico.   
Appellant  walked  into  the  fields  with  a  view  to  avoid  the  road-block  
examination  and  to  overtake  the  car  which  would  have  waited  for  him  
beyond  the  said  road-block.  He  was  seen  walking  into  the  field  by  the  
policeman and he was brought to the Police station at Chattos. There in 
answer to questions put to him he gave false name and address and lied 
about his employment and the name of the driver of the car in which he 
was traveling. When he was searched in his breast pocket of his jacket a 
letter of introduction couched in the following terms was found: "Zedro, 
I am sending you the bearer of. this note and take good care of him. He 
is  a  good  boy  and  a  patriot  to  the  point  of  self-sacrifice,  you  can  trust  
him.  Nobody  should  know  his  identity.  Averoff."  He  was  then  brought  
to Famagusta where he declined to disclose his identity. Before trial he 
did  not  attempt  to  make  any  statement  as  to  his  defence  of  alibi  which  
he put forward at his trial by giving evidence and calling witnesses. 
 
 
              With  a  view  to  establish  motive  the  prosecution  led  evidence  to  
show  that  the  appellant  was  associated  with  a  terrorist  organization  in  
the  Island  called  EOKA,  the  avowed  object  of  which  being  by  acts  of  
violence,  including  acts  of  sabotage  and  murder  of  the  members  of  the  
Police Force, those in the Special Branch in particular, to overthrow the 
Government and bring about Union with Greece. The trial Court on the 
evidence led found that this crime was planned and executed by the said 
terrorist  organization.  We  quote  from  the  judgment  at  page  139:  "We  
have  the  incontrovertible  evidence  that  the  man  who  shot  Poullig  was  
the  man  on  the  bicycle  of  the  accused.  We  had  it  that  the  accused  
disappeared  immediately  after  the  crime,  we  have  it  that  everything  
points  to  this  crime  having  been  planned  and  ordered  by  the  terrorist  
organization known as EOKA and we have it that the accused when he 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
13
disappears after some days of hiding goes off in a motor car with a note 
to one of the leaders of EOKA". 
 
       So far we have endeavoured to give a brief account of the evidence 
adduced before the trial Court which was accepted and acted upon. We 
pass  now  to  the  consideration  of  the  grounds  of  appeal.  We  propose  to  
deal first with the appeal on questions of law. It has been contended that 
the  whole  or  part  of  the  evidence  of  certain  prosecution  witnesses  was  
received at the trial though inadmissible because it relates to acts and/or 
occurrences  by  third  parties  which  took  place  in  the  absence  of  the  
appellant and with which the latter is not connected. 
 
          1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN     
 
       The evidence which was impugned on the ground of inadmissibility 
was adduced in order to establish motive in this crime. Although motive 
is  not  an  ingredient  in  a  felony  or  murder  it  is  relevant  and  of  
importance  to  receive  .  evidence  tending  to  show  or  suggest  motive  on  
the  part  of  an  accused  person.  In  the  words  of  Lord  Chief    Justice  
Campbell in his charge to the jury in Reg. v. Palmer states, "with respect 
to the alleged motive, it is of great importance to see whether there was 
a  motive  for  committing  such  a  crime,  or  whether  there  was  not,  or  
whether there is an improbability of its having been committed so strong 
as  not  to  be  over-powered  by  positive  evidence.  But  if  there  be  any  
motive which can be assigned, I am bound to tell  you that the adequacy 
of that motive is of little importance". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Prosecution   started   with   the   introductory   not   e   found   on   the   
appellant  when  he  was  searched  at  Chattos.  The  note  was  addressed  to  
someone called Zedro. This name was traced back to the 1
st
  April when 
island-wide outrages by EOKA had started in the night preceding. In the 
clothing  of  a  certain  Afxentiou.  from  Lyssi  two  documents  headed  
"Order"  and  "General  Order"  respectively  were  found  addressed  to  
Zedro signed at the end by the leader, Dighenis. These orders Exhibit 14 
(A)  and  (B)  bear  the  letters  EOKA  on  the  top  and  the  contents  clearly  
indicate that Zedro was one of the leaders of EOKA. It was established 
that  Afxentiou,  very  probably  the  one  called  Zedro,  lent  the  car  he  
secured  from  a  certain  Neofytos  Petrou  to  one  Christofis  Panteli  of  
Liopetri  who  was  caught  in  the  early  hours  of  the  1
st
    April  at  
Akhnatransporting  in  this  car  EOKA  pamphlets,  hand-grenades,  anti-
tank  mines  and  other  explosives.  The  said  Pantelis  was  convicted  and  
sentenced  by  Famagusta  Assizes.  On  the  same  night  allover  the  Island  
acts  of  sabotage  took  place.  Military,  Police  and  Public  buildings  were  
the main targets. The pamphlets picked up in Nicosia at Ayios Antonios 
Church  on  the  5th  April  and  on  the  1
st
  July  were  addressed  to  Police  
Force by EOKA and it contained threats against those who resisted their 
 

 
 
14
           1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
           
activities.  The  appellant  sought  protection  from  a  leader  of  EOKA  
called  Zedro  through  an  intermediary,  another  EOKA  man  of  some  
influence  apparently,  called  Averoff,  a  few  days  after  the  killing  of  the  
Police Constable. This fact indicates some association between him and 
the unlawful organization EOKA. The fact that in the open introductory 
letter he was carrying to the District leader of EOKA, he was described 
as  a  patriot  to  the  point  of  self-sacrifice  suggests  strongly  that  he  was  
not a victim of unfortunate circumstances which compelled him to seek 
refuge  at  EOKA  quarters.  So  far  the  evidence  adduced  was  enough  to  
suggest a motive and definitely adequate to negative absence of motive 
on  the  part  of  the  appellant.  Obviously  EOKA  aimed  to  disrupt  peace  
and order in the country and as such naturally was hostile to the police 
force  which  was  to  maintain  law  and  order.  But  the  prosecution  
proceeded  further  and  introduced  evidence  relating  to  the  murder  of  a  
police  sergeant  Costopoullos  and  special  constable  Zavros  and  to  an  
attempt  to  kill  the  victim  in  this  case  and  a  certain  policeman  called  
Aspros  which  attempts  and  murders  were  committed  between  the  1
st
 
July and 11
th
 August last. 
 
 
       Leaflets  picked  up  in  the streets  and  purporting  to  be  issued  by  
EOKA were considered in conj unction with those felonies and like the 
crime under consideration were all found to be attributable to EOKA. 
 
 
 
        Was all this effort directed to prove a motive? Whether the murder 
of  Poullis  is  an  EOKA  murder  or  not  is  not  in  issue  save  so  far  as  to  
suggest  or  prove  motive  on  the part of the appellant. It seems to us the 
prosecution  had  gone  a  bit  too  far  in  this  direction  to  let  in  such  
evidence eve n with a view to prove motive. It is out of proportion to the 
purpose for which it has been received.  We think that such evidence in 
fairness  to  the  accused  ought  to  have  been  excluded.  Accounts  of  such  
crimes ought not to have been introduced in the trial of the appellant. He 
is not connected with them. To trace such crimes to EOKA without trial 
and  while  their  perpetrators  remain  undetected  is  very  difficult  indeed  
and the utmost one could get at is that EOKA is strongly suspected for 
the   commission   of   these   felonies.   Moreover   even   if   this   kind   of   
evidence is strictly admissible in order to ascertain motive its prejudicial 
effect  to  the  defence  might  well  outweigh  the  necessity  of  calling  such  
evidence.  We  think  we  may  relevantly  quote  a  passage  from  the  
judgment of Lord Du Parcq in Noor Mohammed  v.  The  King  (1949),  1  
A.E.R., page 370: 
 
 
 
             "It  is  right  to  add,  however,  that  in  all  such  cases  the  judge  
ought  to  consider  whether  the  evidence  which  it  is  proposed  to  
adduce  is  sufficiently  substantial  having  regard  to  the  purpose  to  
 
 
 
 

 
 
15
which it is professedly directed, to make it desirable in the interest 
of  justice  that  it  should  be  admitted.  If,  so  far  as  that  purpose  is  
concerned, it can in the circumstances of the case have only trifling 
weight,  the  judge  will  be  right  to  exclude  it.  To  say  this  is  not  to  
confuse  weight  with  admissibility.  The  distinction  is  plain,  but  
cases must occur in which it would be unjust to admit evidence of 
a  character  gravely  prejudicial  to  the  accused  even  though  there  
may be some tenuous ground for holding it technically admissible. 
The  decision  must  then  be  left  to  the  discretion  and  the  sense  of  
fairness of the judge." 
 
           1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
       As to the effect of misreception of such evidence in cases where the 
trial Court relied mainly on circumstantial evidence the conviction very 
likely  would  have  been  quashed.  In  the  present  case,  however,  apart  
from circumstantial evidence we have the evidence of the eye-witnesses 
on  whose  testimony  the  trial  Court  chiefly  relied  for  a  conviction.  We  
read   from   Archbold   under   the   subhead   "wrongful   admission   of   
evidence" (page 343 last edition) : 
 
 
 
             "Where  it  is  established  that  evidence  has  been  wrongfully  
admitted,  the  court  will  quash  the  conviction  unless  it  holds  that  
the   evidence   so   admitted   cannot   reasonably   be   said   to   have   
affected  the  minds  of  the  jury  in  arriving  at  their  verdict,  and  that  
they  would  or  must  inevitably  have  arrived  at  the  same  verdict  if  
the  evidence  had  not  been  admitted.  In  considering  this  question,  
the nature of the evidence so admitted and the direction with regard 
to it in the summing-up are the most material matters." 
 
 
 
              The  trial  Court  in  assessing  the  evidence  of  the  eye-witnesses  in  
nowhere  in  the  proceedings  appear  to  have  been  influenced  by  the  
evidence   tending   to   show   motive.   They   considered   at   length   the   
credibility  of  the  eye-witnesses  but  throughout  they  treated  this  aspect  
of  the  case  distinct  from  the  evidence  going  to  motive.  In  our  view  it  
cannot  reasonably  be  argued  that  the  trial  Court  by  receiving  the  
evidence commented upon has been influenced in some way or other in 
accepting  the  evidence  of  the  two  eye-witnesses  or  in  rejecting  the  
evidence of alibi and the witnesses who stated that appellant was not in 
the  group  of  three  men  who  surrounded  the  victim  immediately  before  
he was shot or that he was not the person who ran away from the scene 
of  the  crime  on  a  bicycle.  We  are  of  the  opinion  therefore  that  without  
the evidence thus wrongly admitted the trial Court would have come to 
the same conclusion and on the evidence accepted must inevitably have 
arrived at the same verdict. 
 
 

 
 
16
 
           1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
       The  second  point  of  law  is  that  the  Court  excluded  questions  
properly put to the eye-witness Direkoglou. Defence was not allowed to 
put  the  following  question:  "And  why  then  in  connecting  the  person  
whom  you  were  chasing  and  the  accused  you  did  not  think  of  saying  
that; it occurred to me that it was the person whom I had seen not very 
long ago in my office. Why did you connect him back to the Secretariat 
three   years   ago   and   not   to   the   last   time   you   saw   him   20   days   
previously". This question is repeated by the counsel a little later in the 
following  terms:  "I  must  ask  this  witness,  if  Your  Lordship  rule  my  
question out 1 will of course abide by it, but 1 .do ask the witness why 
instead  of  linking  the  accused  with  the  person  that  had  visited  him  20  
days before this occurrence he linked him with the Secretariat 2-3 years 
ago, that is my question". The President of the Assize Court ruled it out 
and  considered-  it  a  subtle  question  'of  human  psychology  which  the  
witness  was  not:  entitled  to  answer  unless  he  is  an  expert.  The  witness  
previously  to  a  similar  question  had  answered  (at  page  22),  "My  first  
impression on that day was that I had seen him somewhere but I could 
not  make  up  my  mind  where  it  was.  At  the  identification  parade    I  
understood  that  I  had  seen  him  at  the  Secretariat."  "Q.  I  see,  so  it  was  
only at the identification parade, on the 4
th
 September, for the first time 
that you thought that the person whom you were chasing was the person 
whom you had met before at the Secretariat. Am I putting it correctly?" 
A. "Not quite correct. The first thing I saw at the police station was the 
same  person  I  saw  on  the  28
th
  and  the  same  person  I  saw  at  the  
Secretariat". 
 
 
 
       We are of the opinion that the President of the Assize Court was not 
unjustified  in  excluding  this  question  the  answer  to  which  evidently  
leads to nowhere. On the other hand the witness had given an answer to 
a similar question. Going through the shorthand notes of the evidence of 
this  witness  we  do  not  think  that  any  latitude  in  cross-examining  him  
was unreasonably denied to the defence. 
 
 
 
       We pass now to the ground of appeal for which leave to appeal has 
been granted. The first ground is that the conviction having regard to the 
evidence as a whole was unreasonable. 
 
 
 
              The  evidence  accepted  by  the  trial  Court  was  most  critically  
examined by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant: 
 
 
 
       (a) It has been urged that the Court did not attach significance to the 
fact  that  prosecution  brought  an  alleged  eye-witness,  called  Djinkiz,  
whose evidence was fabricated and that from this fact the Court failed to 
infer that influences were at work to the prejudice of the appellant. The 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17
evidence  of  this  witness  was  rejected  by  the  trial  Court  as  being  
unreliable  but  there  is  no  finding  that  this  witness  had  fabricated  his  
evidence.  We  do  not  think  therefore  that  the  Court  failed  to  take  into  
account  a  reasonable  implication  which  would  have  otherwise  arisen  if  
they  had  found  that  the  prosecution  presented  to  the  Court  fabricated  
evidence. 
 
        1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
       (b) The conduct and behaviour of the Police in failing to take down 
part  of  the  statement  from  witness  Damianos,  uncle  of  the  appellant,  
regarding the presence of the appellant in his house at the material time 
of the commission of the offence, which might have been of assistance 
to  the  defence  of  alibi  put  forward  by  the  appellant  in  his  trial,  was  
vehemently  attacked  and  it  has  been  described  as  contemptible  and  
disgraceful  conduct.  The  fact  remains,  however,  that  the  trial  Court  
believed   that   on   the   29
th
   August   and      September   the   uncle   had   
mentioned  to  the  Police  about  this  alibi and  this  considerably  reduced  
the  possible  adverse  effect  this  omission  might  have  in  the  assessment  
of the evidenceof the uncle as to the alibi. 
 
              (c)  It  is  correct  that  Damianos  has  been  misquoted  as  a  defence  
witness in the judgment but there is nothing to suggest that his evidence 
was wrongly assessed on that account. 
 
              d)  The  defence  was  rather  emphatic  in  submitting  that  the  trial  
Court was obviously wrong in holding that if they were unable to accept 
the story of the bicycle, this as a matter of course would have been fatal 
to the alibi. The Court stated (at p. 138 of the notes): "Now his evidence 
falls  into  two  parts,  one,  his  explanation  of  why  his  bicycle  was  being  
ridden  by  Poullis'  assailant  and  the  second  an  alibi. But  both  parts  of  
this  defence  are  closely  bound  up  together.  For,  if  we  are  unable  to  
accept the story of the bicycle it will be fatal of course to the alibi.” We 
find  ourselves  to  some  extent  in  agreement  with  the  defence  in  saying  
that if the trial Court was unable to accept the story of the bicycle, that 
fact alone would not necessarily render fatal the defence of alibi. But the 
Court  did  not  act  under  this  reasoning  in  fejecting  the  defence  of  alibi. 
They   considered   the   defence   of   alibi   at   length   elsewhere   in   the   
judgment and it would not be fair to say that their mind operated within 
the  narrow  limits  of  this  reasoning  in  rejecting  the  alibi.  It  is  not  
infrequent  that  an  unguarded  statement  might  escape  a  judge  in  his  
judgment,  which,  if  taken  in  isolation  and  given  full  weight,  might  
render the findings of such Court unreasonable. But the correct course is 
to  review  the  judgment  as  a  whole  and  ascertain  the  view  taken  by  the  
Court  in  arriving  at  certain  conclusions.  We  do  not  think  therefore  that  
this was a fatal mistake, as it has be en put by the defence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
18
          1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
       It  was  seriously  contended  that  the  Court  was  wrong  in  assessing  
and estimating the value of the evidence of some of the witnesses of the 
prosecution on the one hand, and in attaching little or no weight to some 
witnesses of the prosecution and witnesses for the defence on the other 
hand. It is hardly necessary for us to state again that the trial judge has 
advantage over us in assessing the evidence of the witnesses whom they 
hear  and  their  demeanour  they  watch.  For  a  trial  judge  in  commenting  
on  the  reliability  or  unreliability  of  a  witness  it  is  not  unusual  to  give  
some  reason  or  pass  a  remark  but  speaking  from  experience  on  the  
bench,  a  judge  rarely  gives  his  reasons  exhaustively  in  believing  or  
disbelieving a witness. Therefore, it appears to us unjustified to question 
the finding of a trial court as to the credibility of a particular witness or 
the untruthfulness of another by merely catching a remark which a judge 
might  make  in  his  judgment.  The  assessment  of  the  value  of  the  
evidence  of  a  witness  is  a  matter  eminently  within  the  province  of  the  
trial judge and cannot easily be questioned by a superior court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
       The  evidence  of  the  eye-witnesses  Direkoglou  and  P  .C.  Mehmet  
Ismael which was accepted by the trial Court was carefully examined by 
them  and  we  feel  that  they  were  justified  in  accepting  their  evidence;  
both these witnesses had time and opportunity to see and recognize the 
fugitive  and  the  most  searching  cross-examination  does  not  appear  to  
have shaken their evidence. The possibility of their making a mistake or 
having inadequate time for observation in order to be able to recognize 
the fugitive was all brought to the attention of the trial Court by the able 
counsel  of  the  defence  and  it  was,  no  doubt,  fully  considered  before  a  
verdict  of  guilty  was  reached.  In  this  case  there  was  indeed,  as  it  has  
been   mentioned   earlier   in   our   judgment   when   the   evidence   was   
summarized,  circumstantial  evidence  of  a  rather  strong  nature  which  
goes a long way to implicate the appellant in this crime. The explanation 
given  by  the  defence  for  the  inculpatory  conduct  of  the  appellant  after  
the  commission  of  the  offence  was  also  duly  considered  by  the  trial  
Court and rejected. We do not think that they were unjustified in doing 
so. 
 
 
 
              There  is  no  evidence  to  support  the  contention  that  the  trial  was  
conducted  in  an  atmosphere  of  suspicion  and  prejudice.  The  gravity  of  
the offence with which the appellant was charged would naturally cause 
some strain  during the proceedings at the trial but we are satisfied that 
this did not prevent in any way the appellant from having a fair trial. 
 
 
 
       Under  the  last  ground  of  appeal  headed  "substantial  miscarriage  of  
justice" it has been submitted that after the bicycle of the appellant was 
seized by the Police near the scene of the crime where it was abandoned 
 
 
 
 

 
 
19
by the fugitive, the prosecution jumped to the conclusion and fixed the 
crime on the appellant or at any rate they started investigations under a 
grave suspicion against the accused and from this web of suspicion the 
defence suffered at the trial. The finding of the bicycle of the appellant 
in  the  circumstances  described  naturally  gives  rise  to  a  certain  amount  
of  suspicion  connecting  him  with  the  crime  but  ample  opportunity  was  
given  to  him  to  explain  out  and  dispel  such  suspicion  if  it  had  unjustly  
arisen.  The  explanation  given  was  carefully  examined  and  rejected  by  
the trial Court. 
 
        1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
        For these reasons we think that the appeal should be dismissed. 
___________________ 
 
 
 
       The  appeal  to  the  Judicial  Committee  of  the  Privy  Council  was  
heard  before  Lord  Goddard  (Lord  Chief  Justice  of  England),  Lord  
Oaksey, Lord Tucker, Lord Keith of Avolholm, and Lord Somervell of 
Harrow and judgment was delivered on the 13
th
 April, 1956, by: 
 
 
 
       LORD  OAKSEY:  This  is an  appeal  by  special  leave  from  a  
judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Cyprus  (Zekia  and  Zannetides,  JJ.)  
dismissing the appellant's appeal from the judgment of the Assize Court 
of  Nicosia (Hallinan, C.J., Pierides, P .D.C., and Ekrem, D.J.) whereby 
the appellant was convicted of the murder of a police constable Michael 
Poullis on 28
th
  August, 1955, and condemned to death. 
 
 
 
       The   nature   of   the   juı4isdiction   which   their   Lordships'   Board   
exercises  in  criminal  cases  has  long  been  settled.  In  the  case  of  Lejzor 
Teper v. The Queen [1952] A.C. 480 at p. 491 Lord Normand delivering 
the  opinion  of  the  Board  said  "It  is  now  necessary  to  consider  whether  
the admission of" certain evidence "was. ... 'something which deprived 
the  accused  of  the  substance  of  fair  trial  and  the  protection  of  .the  law'  
(Ibrahim  v.  The  King  [1914]  A.C.599,    Renoul  v.  Attorney-General  for  
Jersey [1936] A.C.445, Dharmasena v. The King [1951] A.C. 1). It is a 
principle of the proceedings of the Board that it is for the appellant in a 
criminal appeal to satisfy the Board that a real miscarriage of justice has 
occurı4ed. In Dal Singh v. The King Emperor (1917) L.R. 44 I.A. 137, it 
was  observed  in  a  case  where  this  Board  had  no  ground  for  doubting  
that the appellant had been properly convicted, that the mere admission 
of  incompetent  evidence,  not  essential  to  the  result,  is  not  a  ground  for  
allowing  an  appeal  against  conviction.  In  the  same  case  it  was  stated  
that "the dominant question is the broad one whether substantial justice 
has been done" and that in the particular case the question was "whether 
looking at the proceedings as a whole, and taking into account what has 
properly be en proved, the conclusion come to has been a just one". 
 
 
 
 

 
 
20
            1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
       It  is  necessary  for  their Lordships  therefore  to  consider  whether  
looking at the pı4oceedings as a whole and taking into account what has 
been properly proved the conclusion come to has be en a j list one. 
 
       On  Sunday  morning  the  28
th
  August,  1955,  there  was  a  political  
meeting of the "old trade unions" at the Alhambra Hall in Ledra Street, 
Nicosia.  The  meeting  finished  at  about  midday.  At  about  12.25  p.m.  
Police  Constable  Poullis,  who  was  on  duty  in  plain  clothes,  was  
standing  in  Ledra  Street  at  the  entrance  to  the  Women's  Market,  which  
is  not  far  from  the  Alhambra  Hall,  when  three  men  walked  out  of  the  
Women's Market and surrounded him. One of the three men fire d three 
shots. Poullis staggered forward a few paces and fell dead. The men ran 
away.  The  man  who  fired  the  shots  picked  up  a  bicycle  from  the  
pavement  some  yards  up  Ledra  Street  as  he  ran.  He  first  pushed  and  
then rode the bicycle. When he came to the junction of Ledra Street and 
Kykko Avenue a member of the public threw a bicycle in his path, and 
thus knocked him off the bicycle. The murderer abandoned the bicycle, 
ran down Kykko A venue, and disappeared into a side turning. The case 
for the prosecution was that this man was the appellant. 
 
 
 
       The evidence of the eye-witnesses called at the trial was conflicting. 
There  were  in  all  eight  'eye-witnesses,  or  alleged  eye-witnesses,  four  
called  by  the  prosecution  and  four  by  the  defence.  Of  the  prosecution  
witnesses  the  first,  Hussein  Mehmet  Djenkiz,  a  taxi  driver,  claimed  to  
have  seen  the  murderer,  and  identified  the  appellant  as  the  murderer  
both in Court and at an identification parade held by the police on the 4
th
  
September, 1955. His evidence was however rejected by the Court. 
 
 
 
       Of  the  three  remaining  prosecution  eye-witnesses,  Christodoulos 
Michael, the person who had thrown his bicycle in front of the escaping 
murderer,   did   not   identify   the   appellant   as   the   murderer   at   the   
identification  parade  and  at  the  trial  said  in  cross-examination  that  the  
appellant was not the murderer but later said "he was not sure". 
 
 
         
       The other two prosecution eye-witnesses were both connected with 
the police. Mehmet Ismael was a police constable and Feyzi Derekoglou 
a  special  constable.  Both  these  witnesses  identified  the  appellant  at  the  
identification parade and in Court. 
 
              The  defence  called  four  eye-witnesses  who  did  not  identify  the  
appellant. The fourth witness was the appellant's brother-in-law, Phidias 
Christodoulou.  Phidias's  story  which  was  corroborated  to  some  extent  
by a café proprietor Costas but was expressly disbelieved by the Assize 
Court was that the appellant had lent him the appellant's bicycle and that 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
21
he had left it outside the Alhambra Hall and that seeing it picked up by 
the murderer and ridden off he had walked to the house of Damianos the 
appellant's uncle where he believed the appellant to be, taking 15 to 20 
minutes on the journey, took the appellant on one side and warned him 
that  the  bicycle  had  been  taken  by  the  murderer  and  was  then  in.  the  
hands  of  the  police.  The  appellant  upon  receiving  this  information  
without  consulting  or  speaking  to  his  uncle  Damianos  or  any  of  those  
with  whom  he  had  been  sitting  since  about  11  a.m.,  immediately  went  
into  hiding  with  a  friend  whose  name  he  refused  to  disclose  and  after  
some  six  days  in  hiding  on  3
rd
    September,  1955,  as  arranged  by  his  
friend  he  was  driven  away  in  a  motor  car  by  a  man  named  Andreas  
Christoudes  who  so  the  appellant  said  threw  a  piece  of  pa  per  into  his  
pocket  telling  him  to  keep  it  and  he  would  tell  him  later  what  it  was.  
The piece of paper bore these words:–  
 
         1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
       "Zedro, 
             I am sending you the bearer of these presents and look after him 
well.  He  is  a  good  boy  and  a  patriot  to  the  point  of  self  sacrifice,  
you can trust him. 
             No one should know about his identity. 
 
AVEROFF ." 
 
 
 
The appellant's evidence continue d as follows:–  
             "It was a piece of folded paper. Q. Did you read it? A. No I did 
not read it. Q. What happened to the driver? A. We went as far as 
Chatos  ViIIage.  Q.  Up  to  the  time  you  reached  Chatos  did  any  of  
you  say  anything  about  the  piece  of  paper  which  he  put  in  your  
pocket? A. No,  he said only "I will take you somewhere and then 
pull up for you to come down. There you will be met by somebody 
wearing  a  blue  shirt.  He  will  greet  you  in  the  following  words:  
"Hallo  koumbare;  are  you  a  Nicosia  man".  And  after  he  tells  you  
these words you will answer him 'Yes'. Then he will ask you have 
you anything for me. Do you know a certain Averoff? Then to that 
question  I  should  have  answered  'Yes'  and  would  hand  him  that  
piece of paper and that I should have followed him." 
 
 
 
Christoudes  and  the  appellant  in  the  car  then  approached  a  police  road  
black and the appellant got out of the car and walked through the fields 
to avoid the police but was later arrested. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     On   the   4th   September,   1955,   the   appellant   was   put   up   for   
identification  and  as  previously  stated  was  identified  by  the  witnesses  
Ismael  and  Derekoglou.  The  identification  parade  was  properly  carried  
out and no criticism of it has been made. Complaint has however be en 
 

 
 
22
         1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
made  that  the  learned  Chief  Justice  at  the  trial  refused  to  allow  certain  
questions  to  be  put  to  Derekoglou  on  the  ground  that  they  were  of  a  
psychological. nature dealing with the point of time at which the witness 
realised that the appellant whom he was chasing was a man he had seen 
before. In their Lordships' view there is no substance in this objection. 
 
       The  conduct  of  the  police was  however  criticised  by  the  Assize  
Court  for  not  recording  a  statement  made  to  them  by  Damianos  which  
according to Damianos' account had told the police on 29
th
  September 
that the appellant was at his house from 11 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. on the day 
of the murder. Police Inspector Kaminarides however did not agree that 
Damianos had reported this but said that Damianos had said he did not 
know where the appellant was but that he came to Damianos' house at 9 
a.m. and left at 11.30 a.m. and that it was untrue that Damianos said the 
appellant left at 1.30 p.m. 
 
 
       It  is  important  to  observe  that  at  no  time  until  the  trial  on  24th  
October, 1955, did the appellant allege that at the time of the murder he 
had been at his uncle's house. 
 
 
 
       At  the  trial  a  number  of  documents  were  given  in  evidence  with  a  
view  to  connect  the  appellant  with  the,  terrorist  activities  of  a  certain  
part  of  the  population  of  Cyprus  and  to  explain  the  word  Zedro  on  the  
document Exhibit 8. 
 
 
 
       The  admission  of  this  evidence  was  the  principal  ground  of  the  
appeal to the Supreme Court of Cyprus and to their Lordships' Board. 
 
 
 
       Their   Lordships   agree   with   the   submission   of   the   appellant's 
Counsel  that  these  documents  with  the  exception  of  Exhibit  8  were  
inadmissible, not merely some of them as the Supreme Court of Cyprus 
has  held,  but  as  already  indicated  the  appellant  has  still  to  satisfy  the  
Board  that  their  admission  turned  the  scales  against  him  and  thereby  
resulted  in  a  miscarriage  of  justice.  This  he  has  failed  to  do.  In  their  
Lordships' opinion the inadmissible evidence added little, if anything, to 
that which was clear from the rest of the evidence, viz. that the murder 
was  a  political  one  and  that  the  appellant  was  in  flight  seeking  the  
protection of persons willing to hide fugitives from justice. The fact that 
there  had  been  a  number  of  crimes  of  violence  committed  by  terrorists  
for  political  ends  was  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  and  it  was  quite  
immaterial whether they had been committed by E.O.K.A. members or 
other persons. In this connection, however, the appellant had admitted in 
cross-examination  that  he  suspected  those  protecting  him  might  be  
connected with E.O.K.A. 
 

 
 
23
 
 
           
       Their  Lordships  have  carefully  considered  the  suggestion  that  a  
young man hearing that his bicycle had been found at the spot where a 
terrorist  murder  had  been  committed  and  remembering  as  he  says  he  
remembered  that  a  bomb  had  exploded  at  the  office  where  he  worked  
might have gone into hiding and afterwards accepted the protection of a 
terrorist  organisation  without  having  been  in  any  way  connected  with  
the crime. This was a matter for the consideration of the members of the 
Assize  Court  who  must  have  rejected  it,  and  their  Lordships  do  not  
consider  that  its  rejection  could  have  been  caused  or  influenced  by  the  
inadmissible evidence. 
 
          1955 
        Nov.  12 
       _______ 
            
MICHALAKIS 
       SAVVA 
KARAOLIDES 
           v. 
   THE QUEEN 
 
       In  view  of  the  identification  of  the  appellant,  of  his  conduct  in  
going  into  hiding  and  of  the  finding  of  the  Assize  Court  who  saw  and  
heard Phidias and the witnesses who spoke to the appellant's alibi, their 
Lordships  are  of  opinion  that  a  miscarriage  of  justice  has  not  been  
established and that the conviction must be affirmed. 
 
 
 
       For  these  reasons  their  Lordships  have  humbly  advised  Her  
Majesty that the appeal ought to be dismissed. 
___________________ 
 
 
 
. 
 