

 
 
 
 
                                                          [ZEKIA,                                                          J.                                                          
AND ZANNETIDES, J.] 
 
MEHMET ALI SULAY,         Appellant (Plaintiff), 
v. 
ANANIYA KAZANDJIAN,    Respondent (Defendant). 
(Civil Appeal No. 4266). 
___________________ 
 
1958 
Dec.4 
1959 
Feb. 4 
_______ 
MEHMET ALI 
SULAY 
v. 
ANANIYA 
KAZANDJIAN 
 
Rent   Restriction––Premises   used   as   a   shoe   shop––Recovery   of   
possession or ejectment––Compensation for loss of occupation––  
Method of assessment-Matters to be excluded-Rent (Control) Law 
1954 ss. 18 and 19. 
 
 
              Held:  By  s.19  of  the  Rent  (Control)  Law,  1954,"  Where  by  
reason of the carrying on by the tenant in the premises of a trade 
or  business  a  goodwill  is-attached  thereto  increasing  the  rental  
value thereof" the court "in giving a judgment or making an order 
under  section  18  for  possession  or  ejectment"  may,  in  certain  
circumstances,   require   the   landlord   to   pay   to   the   tenant   
compensation    "for    the    loss    of    the    occupation    of    the    
premises.......” 
 
 
              An  addition  to  the  rental  value  arising  from  an  increase  in 
population  or  a  change  in  trading  conditions,  or  a  shortage  of  
suitable   premises,   must   be   disregarded   in   determining   the   
increment in value of the premises at the time of the judgment or 
order. 
 
 
              Per  Curiam:  Where  there  is  an  increase  in  the  rental  value  of  
the  premises  within  s.  18  the  extent  of  such  increase  must  be  
determined  in  the  light  of  the  principles  expressed  in  Whiteman 
Smith  Motor  Company  v.  Chaplin  (1934)  2  K.B.35,  Ireland  v.  
Taylor  (1948)  2  All  E.R.450,  and  Rialto  Cinemas Ltd.  v.  Wolfe 
(1955) 1 W.L.R.693. 
 
 
 
Appeal allowed. 
 
 
 
 
 
Cases referred to: 
       (1) Whiteman Smith Motor Company v. Chaplin (1934) 2 K.B.35; 
103 L.J. K.B.328. 
 

 
 
1958 
Dec.4 
1959 
Feb. 4 
_______ 
MEHMET ALI 
SULAY 
v. 
ANANIYA 
KAZANDJIAN
 
       (2) Ireland  v.  Taylor  (1948)  2  All  E.R.450;  (1949)  I  K.B.300;  
(1949) L.J. R. 305. 
 
       (3) Rialto Cinemas Ltd. v. Wolfe (1955) I W.L.R.693,' (1955) 2 All 
E.R.530. 
 
Appeal. 
       The  landlord  appealed  from  the  decision  of  Pierides  D.J.,  dated 
July 10, 1958, in action No. 3679/57, requiring him to pay to the tenant 
£200  compensation  under  s.  19  of  the  Rent  (Control)  Law,  1954.  The  
facts appear in the judgment. 
 
 A. Dana for the appellant. 
L. Clerides for the respondent. 
Cur. adv. vult. 
 
 
        The judgment of the Court was delivered by : 
 
 
        ZEKJA,  J:  This  is  an  appeal  against  an  order  of  the  trial  Court  
requiring the landlord to pay f200 as compensation under section 19 of 
the Rent (Control) Law, 1954. The appellant obtained an order for the 
recovery  of  possession  of  his  shop  under  section  18  sub-section  (i).  
Section 19 of the said Law reads: 
 
 
              "Where  by  reason  of  the  carrying  on  by  the  tenant  in  the 
premises  of  a  trade  or  business  a  goodwill  is  attached  thereto  
increasing  the  rental  value  thereof  and  by  reason  of  giving  up  
possession  of  the  premises  the  landlord  shall  get  the  benefit  of  
such  increase  whilst  the  tenant  shall  suffer  a  lass,  the  Court,  in  
giving  a  judgment  or  making  an  order  under  section  18  for  
possession  or  ejectment,  may  require  the  landlord  to  pay  to  the  
tenant  such  sum  as  would  appear  to  the  Court  to  be  sufficient  to  
compensate  the  tenant  for  the  loss  of  the  occupation  of  the  
premises,  due  regard  being  had  to  the  benefit  derived  by  the  
landlord, and effect shall not be given to such judgment or order 
until such sum is paid". 
 
 
        The main requirements for an order of compensation appear to be: 
 
 
        (a)  that  goodwill  became  attached  to  the  business  premises  in 
question  by  reason  of  the  carrying  thereon  by  the  tenant  of  
some trade or business; 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
       (b) that the rental value has be en increased owing to such business 
having been carried on by the tenant; 
       (c) that the landlord shall get the benefit of such increase ; and 
       (d)  the  tenant  shall  suffer  a  lass  by  giving  up  possession  of  such  
business premises. 
 
       The leading case on a business goodwill in relation to section 4 of 
the  Landlord  and  Tenant  Act,  1927,  which  section  is  similar  to  our  
section  19,  is  Whiteman  Smith  Motor  Company v.  Chaplin  (1934)  2  
K.B.35. In two more recent cases the principles enunciated in the said 
leading  case  were  applied.  These  are  Ireland  v.  Taylor  (1948)  2  All.  
E.R.450  and  Rialto Cinemas  Ltd.  v.  Wolfe  (1955)  1  W.L.R.  693.  For  
the purpose of this appeal, however, we think that hardly any particular 
reference to these cases need be made because in the present case there 
appears to be no evidence to support some of the main requirements of 
section  19  which  constitute  the  prerequisites  for  granting  an  order  of  
compensation  under  it.  The  only  evidence  available  before  the  trial  
Court is the evidence of the tenant which, even if full credit is given to 
it,  is  not  sufficient  to  support  a  claim  for  compensation  under  section  
19. We quote the relevant part of the evidence of the respondent: 
 
1958 
Dec.4 
1959 
Feb. 4 
_______ 
MEHMET ALI 
SULAY 
v. 
ANANIYA 
KAZANDJIAN
 
              "The  rent  is  £4.250  mils  per  month  but  I  spent  for  repairs  of 
this shop until to-day an amount of about £500. I use the shop as a 
merchant of shoes i.e. I am selling in it shoes which either I buy 
from  the  local  market,  or  which  I  import  from  abroad.  I  am  
dealing  with  shoes  for  the  last  30  years.  I  have  now  one  servant  
who  assists  me  in  my  business.  There  is  not  now  any  other  shop  
at  Arasta  street  available  for  my  business.  The  plaintiff  did  not  
ask  me  about  the  shop  before  he  had  bought  it.  Sometime  the  
previous co-owner Mr. Rustem informed me that he sold the shop 
to  the  plaintiff,  and  upon  this  I  sent  the  rent  to  the  plaintiff  who  
did  not  accept  it,  and  I  used  to  send  it  to  him  by  Postal  Orders.  
The value of my goods which I have in my shop is between 3 and 
4  thousand  pounds.  Plaintiff  has  two  other  shops  at  the  same  
street.  The  one  which  is  now  occupied  by  a  third  person  is  near  
the shop in question and the other one which is now occupied and 
used by the plaintiff and which is at a distance of about 50 metres 
from  the  shop  in  question.  At  Arasta  street  there  are  man}  other  
shops  which  are  used  as  shops  for  sale  of  shoes  and  for  sale  of  
clothes   and   as   tailoring-shops.   The   tailoring-shops   are   at   a   
distance of about 50 metres from the shop in question ". 
 
 
 
 
 
       The gist of his evidence is that he spent about £500 on the repairs 
of the shop in question during his tenancy and that he was a dealer in 
 

 
 
1958 
Dec.4 
1959 
Feb. 4 
_______ 
MEHMET ALI 
SULAY 
v. 
ANANIYA 
KAZANDJIAN
 
shoes for 30 years; the value of his stock in trade amounted to £3,000 -
£4,000  and  that  he  employed  a  servant  to  assist  him  in  his  business.  
The  appellant  landlord  is  going  to  demolish  the  premises  in  question  
and  his  business  is  that  of  a  merchant  tailor  and  there  is  nothing  to  
indicate  that  he  will  benefit  in  so  me  way  or  other  from  the  goodwill  
allegedly attached to these premises, no evidence whatsoever showing 
that the rental value of the shop owing to the business carried on by the 
tenant has been increased. There is no evidence, for instance, as to the 
profit he was making originally at the inception of the tenancy and for 
an  increase  of  profit,  if  any,  due  to  the  goodwill  allegedly  attached  to  
the  premises.  If  there  was  an  increase  in  the  rental  value  due  to  
goodwill the extent of such increase should be determined (it should be 
ascertained)  in  the  light  of  the  principles  expounded  in  the  cases  
already referred to. 
 
        Lord  Maugham  J.  in  the  leading  case  above  cited  stated  that  the  
'normal rent' and the 'goodwill rent', if any, of  business premises will 
have to be ascertained' and the difference, if any, should guide a Court 
as  to,  the  amount  to  be  awarded  as  compensation  to  a  tenant.  An  
addition  to  increase  in  the  rental  value  arising  from  an  increase  in  
population  or  a  change  in  trading  conditions  or  a  shortage  in  suitable  
premises  for  a  particular  trade  or  business  is  not  to  be  taken  into  
account  in  ascertaining  the  rental  increase  for  the  purpose  of  section  
19.  The  increase  of  the  rental  value  of  the  premises  at  the  end  of  the  
lease  might  be  wholly  independent,  as  Lord  Maugham  puts  it,  of  the  
direct  result  of  the  carrying  on  of  trade  or  business  by  the  tenant  and  
this should be left out when enquiring for an increase attributable to a 
goodwill  which  came  into  being  by  carrying  on  trade  or  business  by  
the tenant in the shop in question. Repairs and any improvements made 
in  the  shop  by  the  tenant  may  be  altogether  irrelevant  in  ascertaining  
goodwill for the purpose of section 19 of the law. In England the re is 
separate pro-vision for compensating a tenant for improvements made 
on the premises held by him on the termination of the tenancy but this 
is   kept   distinct   altogether   from   payment   of   compensation   for   a   
goodwill.  See  Landlord  and  Tenant  Act,  1927,  sections  1  to  3.  There  
was evidence before the learned judge that the tenant would suffer loss 
by giving up possession but beyond this there was nothing – apart from 
guessing – to satisfy other requirements of the section. 
 
 
        The appeal is therefore allowed with costs on the scale 
of £200. 
 
 
 
Appeal allowed. 
 
 

 
 
   
 
 