

 
 
1
 
                                                            [ZEKIA                                                            
AND ZANNETIDES JJ.] 
THE HELLENIC MINING CO. LTD., 
Appellants, 
AND 
                                              LISSANI MOUSLI,                Respondent. 
(Civil Appeal No. 4221). 
___________________ 
 
1957 
Sept. 25, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
THE HELLENIC 
MINING CO. LTD 
v. 
LISSANI 
MOUSLI 
 
Workmen's Compensation––Injury suffered out of and in the course of 
employment––Tests   applied––Exoneration   of   employer   from   
liability––Workmen's Compensation Law, Cap. 216, section 6. 
 
 
             The respondent was a miner employed by the appellant mining 
company,  and  it  was  part  of  his  duty  to  break  up  acetylene  in  
small pieces in order to fill up his lamp supplied by the appellant 
company and used by him while working in the mine. Millers in 
the  employment  of  the  appellant  company  were  required  to  have  
their lamps filled up and ready for use before they went down the 
mine to start work. 
 
 
              One morning while the respondent was in his house engaged in 
breaking  up  acetylene  to  fill  up  his  lamp  a.  splinter  injured  his  
eye. 
 
 
              The  company's  regulations  prohibited  workmen  from  taking  
acetylene away from the mining area, but there was evidence that, 
with  the  full  knowledge  and  approval  of  the  company's  officers,  
miners were allowed for a considerable time to carry acetylene to 
their houses in order to fill up their lamps. 
 
 
              Held: (1) that, in order to exonerate an employer from liability 
in  a  case  where  it  was  alleged  that  the  workman  sustained  the  
injury  on  account  or  while  he  acted  in  contravention  of  a  rule  or  
regulation of the employer, such contravention on the part of the 
workman should be deliberate or with a reckless disregard of such 
rule or regulation ; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             (2)  that  an  act  which  had  been  prohibited,  or  was  otherwise 
unauthorised,  might  still  be  regarded  as  one  within  the  sphere  of  
employment if it had been the practice of the workmen to ignore 
the  prohibition  or  to  act  in  the  particular  manner  which  had  
 

 
 
2
1957 
Sept. 25, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
THE HELLENIC 
MINING CO. LTD 
v. 
LISSANI 
MOUSLI 
caused   the   injury,   and   the   practice   had   been   permitted   or   
connived at by the employer or his responsible officials ; and that 
the  onus  of  proof  of  the  recognition  of  the  practice  rested  on  the  
workman; 
 
             (3)  that  there  were  prohibitions  which  limited  the  sphere  of 
employment,  and  prohibitions  which  only  dealt  with  conduct  
within  the  sphere  of  employment,  and  that  a  transgression  of  a  
prohibition of the latter class left the sphere of employment where 
it   was,   and   it   consequently   did   not   prevent   recovery   of   
compensation ; 
 
              (4) that, as it was part of the workman’s (respondent’s) duty to 
break up acetylene and fill up his lamp, and as he was engaged in 
doing  something  incidental  to  his  employment,  although  out  of  
working hours, the accident arose out of and in the course of his 
employment,'   and   the   appellant   company   was   liable   to   pay   
compensation. 
 
 
              Tests  to  be  applied  in  determining  whether  an  accident  arose 
out of and in the course of a workman’s employment. 
 
 
 Cases referred to : 
 
       (1) Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway v. Highley (1917) A.C. 359. 
       (2) Mellor v. Ashton (1921) 14 B.W.C.C. 128. 
       (3) St. Helen's Golliery v. Hewitson (1924) A.C. 71. 
       (4) Jenkins v. Elder Dempster Lines (1953) 2 All E.R. 1136. 
       (5) Sexton v. Hosford (1916) 9 B.W.C.C. 
 
 
 
Appeal. 
 
       The  appellants  appealed  against  the  order  of  the  District  Court  of  
Nicosia  (Theocharides  P  .D.C.),  dated  30
th
  April,  1957  (Workmen's  
Compensation Application No. 19/56), by which they were ordered to 
pay  compensation  to  the  respondent  for  personal  injury  sustained  by  
him by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment. 
 
 
        X. Clerides for the appellants. 
       G. Ladas for the respondent. 
 
 
        The  facts  sufficiently  appear  in  the  judgment  of  the  Court  which  
was delivered by : 
 
 

 
 
3
        ZEKIA  J.:  This  is  an  appeal  from  an  order  of  the  President,  
District Court, by which the appellant company was ordered to pay to 
the  respondent  £240  compensation  for  the  injury  received  in  his  right  
eye which resulted in practically losing his said eye. 
 
       The   appellant   company   is   engaged   in   mining   operations   at 
Mitsero. The respondent is a miner living in the village of Peristerona 
some  9-10  miles  away  from  the  locality  where  mine  operations  are  
carried  out.  In  the  morning  of  the  27
th
  February,  1956,  at  about  5.45  
a.m.  white  the  respondent  was  engaged  in  breaking  acetylene  for  
filling  up  his  acetylene  lamp,  supplied  by  the  company,  and  used  by  
miners  white  working  in  the  mines,  a  splinter  broke  off  the  acetylene  
and injured the workman's right eye to the extent we mentioned. 
 
1957 
Sept. 25, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
THE HELLENIC 
MINING CO. LTD 
v. 
LISSANI 
MOUSLI 
        The appellant company used to pick up their workmen daily in the 
morning  and  carry  them  to  the  mines  in  the  company'  s  bus  free  of  
charge and also take them back to their village after the termination of 
their work. 
 
 
        It  is  in  evidence  that  it  has  been  accepted  as  true  by  the  learned  
President  that  the  workmen  were  required  to  fill  up  their  lamps  with  
acetylene––supplied  in  solid  form  which  resembled  a  hard  stone––by  
breaking  it  into  small  pieces  so  as  to  enable  them  to  place  the  same  
into  the  lamp.  Mention  was  made  as  to  regulations  prohibiting  the  
taking  away  of  acetylene  in  tin  boxes  from  the  barracks,  in  the  
neighbourhood  of  the  mine,  but  this  was  posted  in  Greek  and  there  is  
no  evidence  that  the  contents  were  communicated  to  the  workman  in  
question,  whose  mother  tongue  is  Turkish.  On  the  contrary  there  is  
evidence that the workmen for a considerable time in the past, with the 
knowledge of the company's foremen, carried acetylene in tin boxes to 
their  houses  and  there,  after  breaking  the  acetylene  into  pieces,  they  
filled up their lamps which they used during their work in the mines. in 
other  word  s  there  was  evidence  before  the  learned  President  to  find  
that the breaking of acetylene and filling of the lamps of the workmen 
in their houses was a practice recognised by the company. Apart from 
this there was also ample evidence before him to find that the breaking 
of   acetylene   and   filling   of   their   lamps   constituted   part   of   the   
workmen's  duty.  Workmen  were  required  to  have  their  said  lamps  
filled up and ready before they actually entered the mine pit and started 
their work. 
 
 
        The appellant's grounds of appeal were six, but during the hearing 
the  learned  counsel  of  the  appellant  dropped  the  last  three  of  the  
grounds and limited his arguments on the first three. 
 

 
 
4
1957 
Sept. 25, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
THE HELLENIC 
MINING CO. LTD 
v. 
LISSANI 
MOUSLI
 
       By  ground  1  it  is  contended  that the injury of the respondent was 
not  suffered  out  of  and  in  the  course  of  his  employment.  Ground  2  is  
that  the  learned  President  was  wrong  in  concluding  that  the  workmen  
for a considerable time were allowed to take acetylene to their houses 
and  fill  up  their  lamps  there  and  this  was  against  the  regulation.  
Ground  3  relates  to  ground  2  with  an  addition  that  in  coming  to  the  
conclusion described in ground 2 the Court misdirected itself. 
 
 
                We  propose  to  deal  with  grounds  2  and  3  first.  Lord  Finlay  in  
Lancashire  and  Yorkshire  Railway  v.  Highley  (1917)  Appeal  Cases,  
359 remarked: 
 
 
              "It has been of ten pointed out that it is highly undesirable that 
the  findings  of  fact  by  the  county  court  judge  in  workmen's  
compensation cases should be overruled in the Courts of appeal. I 
would refer especially to what was said on this subject in the case 
of Baker v. Earl of Bradford in your Lordships' House." 
 
 
        There was evidence before the learned President that the workmen 
for  a  considerable  time  with  full  knowledge  and  approval  of  the  
appellant's  officer  were  allowed  to  carry    acetylene  from  the  barracks  
of the company to their houses in order to prepare their lamps for their 
work. Viscount Haldane in p.360 of the same case stated : 
 
 
              "  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  county  court  judge  has 
expressly  found  that  it  was  not  fulfilled,  and  that  a  Court  of  
appeal ought not to review his finding unless it is clear either that 
there was no evidence to support it, or that the finding was on the 
face of it erroneous in law"-. 
 
 
        As to the printed regulations requing the workmen to prepare their 
lamps  in  the  barracks,  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  contents  thereof  
were brought to the notice of the workmen and these regulations were 
printed in a language with which the workmen was not acquainted and, 
at  any  rate,  he  could  not  read.  Furthermore,  the  violation  of  such  
regulations  by  miners,  by  taking  acetylene  home  and  preparing  their  
lamps, went on for a considerable time and no steps were taken either 
to   draw   their   attention   to   the   contravention   or   to   call   them   to   
discontinue this practice. It does not appear from the evidence that the 
process  of  smashing  acetylene  and  filling  up  lamps  was  carried  out  
differently  in  the  barracks  than  the  way  the  lamps  were  prepared  by  
workmen  in  their  houses.  No  particular  or  safer  device  or  means  was  
provided  in  the  barracks  for  the  same  process.  In  other  words,  no  
additional  risk  was  run  by  the  workman  for  the  performance  of  this  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5
part of his duty when he chose to do it at home. In order to exonerate 
an employer from liability in case where it is alleged that the workman 
sustained the injury on account or while he acted in contravention of a 
rule or regulation of the company, such contravention on the part of the 
labourer should be deliberate or with a reckless disregard. Section 6 (b) 
(ii) of the Workmen's Compensation Law, Cap. 216, reads: 
 
1957 
Sept. 25, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
THE HELLENIC 
MINING CO. LTD 
v. 
LISSANI 
MOUSLI 
              "A   contravention   of   any   Law,   regulation,   role   or   order,   
whether statutory or otherwise, expressly made for the purpose of 
ensuring  the  safety  or  health  of  workmen,  or  of  preventing  
accidents   to   workmen,   if   the   contravention   was   committed   
deliberately or with a reckless disregard of the terms of such Law, 
regulation rule or order." 
 
 
        In the present case, as the President said in his judgment, there was 
no  evidence  that  the  contents  of  the  regulations  in  question  were  
communicated  or  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  workman  and  in  
such  a  case  we  cannot  assume  that  there  was  a  deliberate  or  reckless  
disregard  of  regulations  by  a  workman.  Furthermore,  it  has  been  
proved that a practice has been established which was contrary to such 
regulations.  In  this  connection  I  read  from  p.  52–53  of  Willis’s  
Workmen's Compensation, 36
th
 Edition: 
 
              "An  act  which  has  been  prohibited,  or  which  is  otherwise 
unauthorised or unwarranted, may still be regarded as one within 
the  sphere  of  employment  if  it  has  been  the  practice  of  the  
workmen  to  ignore  the  prohibition  or  to  act  in  the  particular  
manner  which  has  caused  the  injury,  and  the  practice  has  been  
permitted,  connived  or  "  winked"  at  by  the  employers  or  their  
responsible  officials.  The  onus  of  proof  of  recognition  of  the  
practice  rests  on  the  workman.  (Mellor  v.  Ashton  (1921)  14  
B.W.C.C. 128)." 
 
 
        We also read from the same book, page 46 : 
             " It is necessary to consider the character and effect of the rules 
because there is a clear distinction to be drawn between an order 
which  defines  what  work  shall  be  done  by  a  workman,  and  an  
order  which  merely  defines  how  the  work  shall  be  done.  The  
proposition  has  been  thus  formulated:  There  are  prohibitions  
which  limit  the  sphere  of  employment,  and  prohibitions  which  
only  deal  with  conduct  within  the  sphere  of  employment.  .A  
transgression of a prohibition of the latter class leaves the sphere 
of  employment  where  it  was,  and  consequently  will  not  prevent  
recovery of compensation." 
 
 

 
 
6
1957 
Sept. 25, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
THE HELLENIC 
MINING CO. LTD 
v. 
LISSANI 
MOUSLI
 
              W  e  do  not  think,  therefore,  that  the  appellant  could  succeed  on  
grounds 2 and 3. 
 
              We  turn  now  to  the  main  ground  of  appeal,  namely,  ground  1.  
Section 6 of the Workmen's Compensation Law is as follows: 
             "  If  in  any  employment  a  workman  suffers  personal  injury  by  
accident  arising  out  of  and  in  the  course  of  his  employment  his  
employer shall be liable to pay compensation.'  
 
 
        This  is  similar  to  the Workmen's  Compensation  Acts  in  England.  
As  the  learned  counsel  of  the  appellant  pointed  out,  there  are  two  
requisites   which   should   exist   to   enable   a   workman   who   suffers   
personal   injury   by   accident   to   recover   compensation   from   the   
employer:  (a)  That  the  accident  should  arise  out  of  his  employment  
and  (b)  in  the  course  of  his  employment.  It  was  stressed  during  the  
arguments that even if the accident had arisen out of his (respondent's) 
employment  it  did  not  occur  in  the  course  of  his  employment  and  as  
such he is not entitled to any compensation. 
 
 
        The learned counsel of respondent referred to the test propounded 
by  Lord  Summer  in  Lancashire  and  Yorkshire  Railway  v.  Highley 
cited above. It is the following, at page 372: 
 
 
              " Was it part of the injured person's employment to hazard, to 
suffer  or  to  do  that  which  caused  his  injury?  If  yea,  the  accident  
arose out of his employment. If nay, it did not." 
 
 
        This  test  is  valuable  for  ascertaining  the  first  requirement  just  
referred  to.  N  o  doubt  the  two  phrases,  namely,  arising  out  and  in  the  
course  of  employment  overlap  because  both  are  co-related  and  bound  
up.  However,  the  test  suggested  for  the  second  requisite  by  Lord  
Atkinson in St. Helen's Colliery v. Hewitson (1924)  Appeal  Cases  71,  
is very helpful: 
 
              "  I  myself  have  been  rash  enough  to  suggest  a  test–namely, 
that a workman is acting in the course of his employment when he 
is engaged 'in doing something he was employed to do.' Or what 
is,  in  other  and  I  think  better  words,  in  effect  the  same  thing–  
namely, when he is doing something in discharge of a duty to his 
employer,   directly   or   indirectly,   imposed   upon   him   by   his   
contract of service. The true ground upon which the test should be 
based  is  a  duty  to  the  employer  arising  out  of  the  contract  of  
employment,  but  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  word  "  
employment ", as here used, covers and includes things belonging 
to or arising out of it." 
 

 
 
7
        A more simple test for the second requirement was suggested in a 
recent  case  by  Sir  Raymond  Evershed,  M.R.  in  Jenkins  v.  Elder  
Dempster Lines (1953) 2 All E.R. 1136 : 
 
             "Was  the  workman  at  the  relevant  time  acting  in  the  scope  of 
his employment'" 
1957 
Sept. 25, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
THE HELLENIC 
MINING CO. LTD 
v. 
LISSANI 
MOUSLI 
        The  facts  of  the  present  case  as  found  by  the  learned  President  
support  the  presence  of  both  requisites  in  this  case.  It  was  part  of  the  
workman's duty to break acetylene and fill up the lamp and this clearly 
satisfied the test of Lord Sumner. He was at the time employed by the 
appellant  company  and  indeed  the  accident  happened  shortly  before  
the  company's  bus  was  due  to  take  him  to  the  mines.  The  expression  
"in the course of the employment" does not me an merely "during the 
currency  of  the  time  of  the  engagement"  (see  p.  22  of  Willis's  
Workmen's  Compensation)  and  when  we  apply  the  test  suggested  by  
Lord Atkinson we find no difficulty in saying that the circumstances in 
this  case  fulfill  also  the  second  requisite  because  he  was  engaged  in  
doing   something   which   he   was   employed   to   do;   and   the   word   
'employment'  as  is  suggested  in  the  test  covers  and  includes  the  
incident  of  employment.  It  makes  no  difference  that  the  accident  
occurred   out   of   working   hours.   In   Sexton   v.   Hosford   (1916)   9   
B.W.C.C.,  "A  baker  returned  to  a  dough-mixing  machine  after  the  
day's work was finished, in order to oil the machine, as was necessary 
if it was to work properly on the following day. He was injured while 
doing so. There was contradictory evidence as to whether the baker or 
a special man had to oil the machine, but the baker said he understood 
it  was  part  of  his  contract  of  employment  to  do  so.  Held,  there  was  
evidence to support the finding of the arbitrator that the accident arose 
in the course of the employment." 
 
 
                In  Highley's  case  the  workman  after  changing  his  train  was  
waiting  at  a  railway  station  to  catch  another  train  which  would  have  
taken him to his place of employment. He had to wait for one and half 
hours and during that interval he wanted to go to the mess room in the 
station  to  prepare  his  meal  there.  In  order  to  reach  the  mess  room  he  
attempted to cross the line by crawling under a truck which was at the 
time  stationary,  but  at  the  moment  he  crawled  under  it,  it  was  moved  
and  crushed  him  to  death.  There  is  clear  indication  throughout  the  
judgment in that case that had the workman not followed a dangerous 
route  which  constituted  an  "added  peril"  and  followed  the  usual  path  
he would have been entitled to recover compensation. The workman in 
the  present  case  was  engaged  in  doing  something  incidental  to  his  
employment  and  it  was  shortly  before  he  was  to  be  collected  by  the  
 

 
 
8
company's bus from his village to the place of his employment that the 
accident occurred. 
 
                We  think  therefore  that  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case  the  
learned  President  was  right  in  finding  that  the  accident  which  caused  
the  loss  of  one  eye  of  the  respondent  had  arisen  out  of  and  in  the  
course of his employment. Appeal dismissed with costs. 
 
 
 
Appeal dismissed. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 