

 
 
1
 
                                                            [ZEKIA                                                            
AND ZANNETIDES JJ.] 
 
                                      ERINI PAPANTONIOU,                Appellant, 
AND 
THE ATTORNEY–GENERAL AND AN OTHER, 
Respondents. 
(Civil Appeal No. 4223). 
___________________ 
 
1957 
Sept. 26, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
ERİNİ 
PAPANTONIOU 
v. 
ATTOTNRY-  
GENERAL AND 
ANOTHER 
 
 
Practice––Action    against    Government––Declaratory    Judgment––    
Attorney–General   Defendant––Fiat   of   Governor   necessary––   
Courts of Justice Law, 1953, section 64. 
 
Jurisdiction–– Action against Government––Declaratory Judgment –– 
Action maintainable in District Court. 
 
Action   against   Government––Declaratory   Judgment––Petitions   of   
Right Act, 1860.  
 
 
              The  appellant  brought  an  action  in  the  District  Court  against  
the   Government   of   Cyprus   through   the   Attorney–General   
claiming a declaration that the Government was liable to repair a 
portion  of  a  public  road  adjacent  to  her  property  in  order  to  
prevent rain water from overflowing into her land. 
             The   appellant   did   not   obtain   the   written   consent   of   the 
Governor authorising her to bring the action under the provisions 
of section 64 of the Courts of Justice Law, 1953. 
 
 
              The trial Judge held that the action was in substance an action 
in tart, and, as no such claim was maintainable against the Crown, 
dismissed the action against the Government. 
 
 
              Held: (1) that the action was not based on tort ; 
              
             (2)  that  the  claim  did  not  relate  to  acts  or  omissions  where 
ministerial authority was called in question because the defendant 
in  the  action  was  the  Government  itself  and  not  any  of  its  
ministers,  and  the  action  could,  therefore,  be  instituted  in  the  
District Court. 
 
 
              Nearchos  Haji  Soteriou  and  others  v.  B.  J.  Weston  (1956)  21  
C.L.R. 211, referred to: 
 

 
 
2
1957 
Sept. 26, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
ERİNİ 
PAPANTONIOU 
v. 
ATTOTNRY-  
GENERAL AND 
ANOTHER 
 
             (3) that the appellant's claim did not fall within the ambit of the 
Petitions of Right Act, 1860; and that the seeking of a declaration 
constituted a claim under section 64 of the Courts of Justice La w, 
1953; and 
 
             (4) that in view of the provisions of section 64 of the Courts of 
Justice  Law,  1953,  the  Courts  in  Cyprus  had  no  jurisdiction  to  
entertain any claim whats6ever against the Government, including 
a  claim  for  a  declaratory  judgment,  in  the  absence  of  the  written  
consent of the Governor. 
 
 
 
             Appeal dismissed. 
 
Cases referred to : 
 
 
        (1) Haji Soteriou and others v. Weston (1956) 21 C.L.R. 211. 
       (2)  Wigg  and  another  v.  The  Attorney-General  for  the  Irish  Free  
State (1927) A.C. 674. 
       (3) Dyson v. Attorney-General (1911) 1 K.B. 410. 
 
 
 
Appeal. 
              The  appellant  appealed  against  the  judgment  of  the  District  Court  
of  Kyrenia  (Evangelides  D.J  .),  dated  26
th
  April,  1957  (Action  No.  
84/56), dismissing the appellant's claim against the Attorney–General. 
 
 
 Chr. Mitsides and C. Melissas for the appellant. 
Ali Dana for the respondents. 
 
 
        The  facts  sufficiently  appear  in  the  judgment  of  the  Court  which  
was delivered by : 
 
 
                ZEKIA  J.  :  The  plaintiff-appellant  brought  an  action  before  the  
District  Court  of  Kyrenia  against  the  Government  of  Cyprus  through  
the  Attorney–General  by  which  she  claimed  a  declaration  that  the  
Government  is  liable  to  repair  a  portion  of  road  (Lapithos-Myrtou)  
adjacent to the plaintiff's property at Ayios Theodhoros quarter in such 
a  manner  as  not  to  allow  an  overflow–presumably  of  the  rain  water  –  
into  the  plaintiff's  land  and  cause  damage  to  it.  Although  damages  
were  claimed,  nothing  was  alleged  in  the  pleadings  to  support  such  a  
claim. 
 
 
        The  defendants  by  paragraph  1  of  the  Statement  of  Defence  
alleged  that  "the  statement  of  claim  does  not  disclose  any  cause  of  
 
 
 

 
 
3
action against the Government of Cyprus; that the facts alleged therein 
have nothing to , do with the Government of Cyprus; that prior to the 
institution  of  this  action  plaintiff  never  voiced  a  complaint;  that  in  
consequence  of  the  above  the  action  is  misconceived  and  vexatious  
and will not lie." 
 
       The  learned  District  Judge  considered  that  the,  action  was  in  
substance one in tort and, as no such claim is maintainable against the 
Crown, dismissed the action against the Government. 
 
1957 
Sept. 26, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
ERİNİ 
PAPANTONIOU 
v. 
ATTOTNRY-  
GENERAL AND 
ANOTHER 
        Alternatively,  it  has  also  been  argued  in  the  Court  below  that  the  
claim related to acts or omissions where ministerial authority is called 
in question and, relying on a recent case of this Court, Nearchos  Haji  
Soteriou  and  others v.  B.  J.  Weston  (1956)  21  C.L.R.  211,  an  action  
could not have been instituted in the District Courts. 
 
 
        It is apparent from the pleadings, and it has been admitted boy the 
parties,  that  the  plaintiff  did  not  obtain  the  written  consent  of  the  
Governor authorising her to bring the action in question although such 
a  consent  is  indispensable  in  accordance  with  Section  64  (2)  of  the  
Courts  of  Justice  Law,  1953,  in  actions  with  claims  against  the  
Government. 
 
 
                The  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  were  four  :  (1)  That  the  Court  
was wrong in deciding that this action  was  one  based  on  tort.  (2)  The  
action was one which could only be brought by petition of right or by 
an action for a declaratory judgment because the subject–matter relates 
to interference by the Crown with the property of the plaintiff and that 
the  rights  of  the  Crown  are  affected.  (3)  Assuming  the  interference  
complained of to amount to a tort the remedy lies by proceeding under 
the Petitions of Right .Act, 1860, or by declaration affecting the rights 
of  the  Crown.  (4)  The  case  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  questioning  of  
the exercise of ministerial authority and therefore the plaintiff need not 
have instituted proceedings before the Supreme Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       We  are  inclined  to  agree  with  the  appellant  on  grounds  1  and  4.  
We are of the opinion that the action was not based on tort ; although 
damages were claimed in the statement of claim, nothing was pleaded 
to  support  such  a  claim  and  the  only  issue  before  the  trial  court  was  
whether  the  plaintiff  was  entitled  to  a  declaratory  judgment  she  
claimed  for.  Paragraph  4  {a)  of  the  statement  of  claim,  no  doubt,  
anticipates as a future event the commission of a civil wrong but none 
is alleged as having been committed. The present claim therefore is not 
based on a civil wrong. At any rat e the Crown is protected from being 
 

 
 
4
1957 
Sept. 26, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
ERİNİ 
PAPANTONIOU 
v. 
ATTOTNRY-  
GENERAL AND 
ANOTHER
 
sued from the civil wrongs enumerated in the Civil Wrongs Law, all of 
which  relate  directly  to  the  commission  of  torts.  It  is  obvious  that  
ground  4  is  not  relevant  in  this  case  because  the  defendant  is  the  
Government itself and not any of its ministers. 
 
       The  remaining  grounds  raise  two  points  for  consideration: (a) 
Whether  the  action  brought  could  be  instituted  under  the  Petitions  of  
Right .Act, 1860, and in the alternative (b) Whether the claim, being in 
the nature of a declaratory judgment affecting the rights of the Crown, 
could not, independently of any provisions in section 64 (1) and (2) of 
the  Courts  of  Justice  Law,  1953,  be  maintained  in  view  of  the  
authorities i.e. Wigg and another v. The Attorney–General for the Irish 
Free State (1927). Appeal Cases, 674, and Dyson v. Attorney–General 
(1911) 1 K.B. 410, we are of the opinion that the claim involved in the 
present  action  does  not  fall  within  the  ambit  of  the  Petitions  of  Right  
Act, 1860. 
 
        Farwell L.J. in the latter case at p. 421 states: 
 
 
              "In  a  case  like  the  present  the  .Attorney–General  is  properly  
made  defendant.  It  has  been  settled  law  for  centuries  that  in  a  case  
where  the  estate  of  the  Crown  is  directly  affected  the  only  course  of  
proceeding  is  by  petition  of  right,  because  the  Court  cannot  make  a  
direct  order  against  the  Crown  to  convey  its  estate  without  the  
permission of the Crown, but when the interests of the Crown are only 
indirectly affected the Courts of Equity, whether the Court of Chancery 
or  the  Exchequer  on  its  equity  side  (see  Deare  v.  Attorney–General), 
could and did make declarations and orders which did affect the rights 
of  the  Crown.  The  two  cases of Pawlett  v.  Attorney–General  and  
Hodge  v.  Attorney–General  on  the  one  hand  and  Reeve  v.  Attorney  –
General on the other are good illustrations of the distinction." 
 
 
        There remains the last point to be considered, namely, whether the 
claim  for  a  declaratory  judgment,  citing  the  Attorney–General  on  
behalf of the Government as a defendant, could be brought by way of 
action  without  fiat.  In  support  .of  the  affirmative,  the  learned  counsel  
of the appellant relied (a) on the authorities just cited and (b) on Order 
27, r. 4, which reads : 
 
 
              "No  action  or  proceeding  shall  be  open  to  objection  on  the 
ground  that  a  merely  declaratory  judgment  or  order  is  sought  
thereby,  and  the  Court  may  make  binding  declarations  of  right  
whether any consequential relief is or could be claimed, or not." 
 
 

 
 
5
        As  we  have  already  stated,  on  the  authorities  mentioned,  actions  
for   declaratory   judgments   and   orders   against   the   Crown   are   
maintainable  in  England  and  a  plaintiff  is  not  bound  to  proceed  by  
petition  of  right.  In  view  of  O.25,  r.5,  which  is  identical  with  r.4  of  
O.27 of our Civil Procedure Rules, consequential relief or remedy need 
not be claimed in such actions. 
 
       Section  64,  sub-sections  1 and  2,  of  the  Courts  of  Justice  Law,  
1953, read as follows: 
 
1957 
Sept. 26, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
ERİNİ 
PAPANTONIOU 
v. 
ATTOTNRY-  
GENERAL AND 
ANOTHER 
              "(1) No claim of any kind whatsoever, and whether by way of 
original  claim,  counter–claim,  set-off,  or  otherwise,  against  the  
Government, shall be entertained in any Court unless it be a claim 
of  the  same  nature  as  claims  which  may  be  preferred  against  the  
Crown  in  England,  under  the  provisions  of  the  .Act  23  and  24  
Vict., Chap.34, intituled The Petitions of Right .Act, 1860. 
 
 
              (2)  No  claim  which  may  otherwise  lawfully  be  ma  de  against 
the  Government  shall  be  entertained  in  any  Court  unless  the  
claimant shall have obtained the written consent of the Governor 
authorizing  such  claimant  to  bring  an  action  in  such  form  and  
subject  to  such  qualifications  as  the  Governor  in  respect  of  such  
claim may direct, in manner hereinafter provided." 
 
 
        It  is  clear  from  this  section  of  the  Law  that  no  claim  of  any  kind  
whatsoever  could  be  entertained  unless  such  claim  falls  within  the  
ambit  of  the  Petitions  of  Right  .Act,  1860.  The  second  sub-section  
provides   that   where   a   claim   can   lawfully   be   made   against   the   
Government an action shall not be entertained in any Court unless the 
claimant  obtains  the  written  consent  of  the  Governor.  In  short,  this  
section  enacts  that  any  claim  against  the  Government  can  only  be  
maintained  (a)  if  such  a  claim  is  maintainable  under  the  Petitions  of  
Right  Act,  1860  and  (b)  a  fiat  is  obtained  by  the  claimant  to  bring  an  
action. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       The appellant in this case submitted that her claim falls within the 
subject-matters  where  a  petition  of  right  would  lie  and,  if  not,  a  
declaratory  judgment  could  be  maintained  without  the  consent  of  the  
Government. The words "no claim of any kind whatsoever" in section 
64  (1)  are  so  comprehensive  that  in  our  view  they  leave  no  room  for  
contention that an action brought by a plaintiff against the Government 
in  respect  of  a  claim,  in  whatever  form  that  claim  is  presented,  can  
only be entertained if the provisions of the section are complied with. 
One  cannot  reasonably  argue  that  the  declaratory  judgment  sought  
 

 
 
6
1957 
Sept. 26, 
Oct. 12 
_______ 
ERİNİ 
PAPANTONIOU 
v. 
ATTOTNRY-  
GENERAL AND 
ANOTHER
 
from  the  court,  admittedly  affecting  the  rights  of  the  Crown,  does  not  
constitute a claim against the Government.  The  plaintiff,  in  paragraph  
4 of her statement of claim, after giving the facts states: "The plaintiff, 
therefore,   institute   s   the   present   action   by   which   she   claims   a   
declaration by the Court etc., etc.".  We cannot see how one can limit 
the meaning of the word "claim" in section 64 to cases where a relief is 
sought  excluding  claims  for  binding  declaration  of  rights  affecting  
Government interests. There appears to us nothing inconsistent in r. 4 
of  O.  27  with  section  64  of  the  Courts  of  Justice  Law.  Rule  4  lays  
down that no action or proceeding shall be defeated on the ground that 
merely a declaratory judgment or order is sought. The appellant in this 
case   fails   not   because   the   appellant   in   her   action   asked   for   a   
declaratory  judgment  only  but  because  what  she  asks  constitutes  a  
claim  against  the  Government  and  the  Courts  have  no  jurisdiction  to  
entertain  such  a  claim  in  the  absence  of  a  written  consent  of  the  
Governor.  Even  if  we  concede  that  the  subject–matter  of  the  action  is  
one  for  which  a  petition  of  right  lies,  again  for  the  same  reason  the  
application cannot proceed. 
 
        For these reasons the appeal is dismissed with costs. 
 
 
 
Appeal dismissed. 
 
  
 
 
  