

 
 
1
 
                                                            [ZEKIA                                                            
AND ZANNETIDES JJ.] 
 
REGINA, 
v. 
SHEVKI REDJEB. 
(Criminal Appeal No. 2088). 
 
1957 
March 26 
______ 
REGINA 
v. 
SHEVKI 
REDJEB 
 
Evidence in criminal cases––Child––Corroboration––Sworn Evidence. 
 
 
               The appellant, who was tried together with two other persons, 
was  convicted  of  possessing  explosive  articles  on  the  sworn  
evidence of a boy of 12 years of age. 
 
 
              Held: (1) The sworn evidence of a child need not, as a matter 
of  law,  be  corroborated,  but  a  Judge  should  direct  himself  that  
there is a risk in acting on the uncorroborated evidence of young 
boys  or  girls,  though  he  may  do  so  if  convinced  the  witness  is  
telling the truth. 
 
 
             Campbell (1956) 40 Cr. App. R. 95, applied. 
 
              (2) In the circumstances of this case it did not appear from the 
summing  up  that  the  Judge  had  considered  the  case  of  the  
appellant  separately  and  that,  having  found  that  the  case  against  
him  was  supported  only  by  the  evidence  of  a  boy  of  12  years  of  
age, he decided to act on such evidence. 
 
 
              Conviction quashed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        [Editorial Note: This judgment refers to the sworn evidence of a 
child  aged  twelve.  As  regards  children  of  cc  tender  years",  
section 9 of the Evidence Law, Cap. 15, provides that a child 
of  tender  years  may  give  unsworn  evidence  in  any  criminal  
proceedings,  but  the  person  accused  cannot  be  convicted  
unless  such  unsworn  evidence  is  corroborated  by  material  
evidence    implicating    the    accused.    The    corresponding    
provision  in  England  is  section  38  (1)  of  the  Children  and  
Young Persons Act, 1933. It wi11 be observed that there is no 
definition  either  in  the  English  Act  or  in  the  Cyprus  statute  
(Cap.  15)  of  what  is  meant  by  cc  a  child  of  tender  years  ".  
Though  cc  child"  is  defined  in  the  English  Act  as  a  person  
under  the  age  of  14,  there  is  no  similar  definition  in  the  
Cyprus statute. 
 

 
 
2
1957 
March 26 
______ 
REGINA 
v. 
SHEVKI 
REDJEB
 
              Under  the  second  proviso  to  sub-section  (1)  of  section  54  of  
the  Criminal  Procedure  Law,  Gap.  14,  it  is  provided  that  the  
court may examine without oath any child of tender years who 
does not, in the opinion of the court, understand the nature of 
an oath. Whether a child is of tender years is a matter for the 
court to decide (see Campbell (1956) 40 Cr. App. R. 95 at p. 
99).] 
 
 Case referred to : 
       Campbell (1956) 40 Cr. App. R. 95. 
 
 
 
Appeal against conviction. 
       The appellant was convicted at the Special Court in Nicosia (Case 
No.  594/57)  on  the  9
th
  February,  1957,  of  the  offence  of  possessing  
explosive  articles,  contrary  to  Regulations  53  (b)  and  72  (c)  of  the  
Emergency  Powers  (Public  Safety  and  Order)  Regulations,  1955,  to  
(No.13)   1956,   and   was   sentenced   by   John   J.   to   9   months'   
imprisonment. 
 
 
        O. Orek for the appellant. 
       H. Gosling for the Cİ'own. 
       The judgment of the Court was delivered by; 
 
 
        ZEKIA,  J.  :  The  case  against  the  appellant  rests  solely  on  the  
sworn evidence of a boy of 12 years of age who had seen the appellant 
from  his  back  from  a  distance  of  two  donums  removing  4  mortar  
bombs  placed  on  a  carob  tree.  Although  there  was  a  gathering  at  the  
spot  and  a  few  other  witnesses  came  and  gave  evidence  against  the  
other co-accused, no other witness has seen the appellant removing the 
bombs from the carob tree. The boy has been cross-examined as to the 
possibility  of  his  making  a  mistake  and  he  expressed  himself  in  the  
words  "  I  thought  it  was  he"  which  might  very  well  indicate  that  he  
was not very sure of his identification. 
 
 
                As  a  general  role  the  sworn  evidence  of  a  child  under  14  can  be  
acted  upon  after  careful  caution.  The  statement  of  law  is  given  in  a  
recent  case,  the  case  of  Forbes  McArthur  Campbell  (1956),  40  Cr.  
App. R. 95. Lord Goddard C.J. at p.102 said:- 
 
 
 
 
 
             "  To  bum  up,  the  unsworn  evidence  of  a  child  must  be 
corroborated   by   sworn   evidence;   if   then   the   only   evidence   
implicating  the  accused  is  that  of  unsworn  children,  the  judge  
 

 
 
3
1957 
March 26 
______ 
REGINA 
v. 
SHEVKI 
REDJEB
 
must  stop  the  case.  It  makes  no  difference  whether  the  child's  
evidence  relates  to  an  assault  on  him  or  herself  or  to  any  other  
charge, for example, where an unsworn child says that he saw the 
accused  person  steal  an  article.  The  sworn  evidence  of  a  child  
need not, as a matter of law, be corroborated, but a jury should be 
warned,  not  that  they  must  find  corroboration,  but  that  there  is  a  
risk  in  acting  on  the  uncorroborated  evidence  of  young  boys  or  
girls, though they may do so if convinced the witness is telling the 
truth, and this warning should also be given where a young boy or 
girl  is  called  to  corroborate  the  evidence  either  of  another  child,  
sworn  or  unsworn,  or  of  an  adult.  The  evidence  of  an  unsworn  
child  can  amount  to  corroboration  of  sworn  evidence,  though  a  
particularly careful warning should in that case be given." 
 
        Apart from the inherent weakness in the evidence of this boy there 
appears that the learned Judge in his summing up misdirected himself 
in  assuming  that  the  appellant,  accused  3  in  the  Court  below,  has  
participated  in  the  crime  from  the  very  start  along  with  other  two  
accused. At page 26 he said: 
 
 
              "They all confirm they saw all three accused removing a khaki 
coloured  bag,  or  sack,  containing  exhibit  1  from  hiding  in  the  
bushes ". 
 
 
        Here  it  is  not  disputed  that  the  learned  Judge  was  making  an  
erroneous  finding  because  there  is  no  evidence  whatsoever  to  support  
this statement as far as accused (3) is concerned. It does not appear at 
all  from  the  summing  up  that  he  considered  the  case  of  the  appellant  
separately  and  that  having  found  that  the  case  against  him  was  
supported  only  by  the  evidence  of  the  said  boy  he  decided  to  act  on  
such evidence. On the contrary, from the summing up we have quoted, 
it  appears  that  his  mind  was  improperly  influenced  by  the  wrong  
supposition that the appellant , accused 3, was implicated in the matter 
from   the   very   start   along   with   the  other  co-accused.  We  think,  
therefore,  that  the  conviction  in  this  case  cannot  stand  and  that  the  
appeal should be allowed. 
 
 
 Conviction quashed. 
 
  
 
 
 
 