

 
 
1
 
 
[ZEKIA AND ZANNETIDES JJ.] 
ANDREAS KLEANTHOUS HAJI GEORGHIOU, 
Appellant, 
v. 
                                             THE POLICE,                        Respondents. 
(Criminal Appeal No. 2082). 
__________________ 
 
       1957 
    March 22,26 
_________ 
ANDREAS 
KLEANTHOUS 
HAJI 
GEORGHIOU 
v. 
THE 
POLICE 
 
Criminal  Law––Meaning  of  "taking  upon  himself  the  disposition"  ––  
Inciting to steal––Property of Her Majesty (Theft and Possession) 
Law, Gap. 28, section 2 (1) (b)––Criminal Code, Cap.13, sections 
249 and 364 (a) and (b). 
 
 
 
Criminal Procedure––Powers of Supreme Court on appeal by accused 
––Power   to   convict   of   offence   of   which   accused   has   been   
acquitted––Criminal  Procedure  Law,  Gap.  14,  section  142  (1)  
(c). 
 
 
              The  appellant  asked  a  soldier  to  get  him  a  pistol,  and  he 
offered £1 for a pistol which he was allowed to test in the soldier's 
camp.  He  then  asked  the  solider  to  take  the  pistol  outside  the  
camp. 
 
             On this evidence the appellant was convicted of the offence of 
inciting  a  soldier  to  take  upon  himself  the  disposition  of  a  pistol  
belonging to Her Majesty, and he was acquitted of the offence of 
inciting him to steal the said pistol. 
 
 
              Held:  (1)  That  the  appellant  was  guilty  of  the  offence  of  
inciting  a  soldier  to  steal  the  said  pistol  and  not  guilty  of  the  
offence  of  inciting  him  to  take  upon  himself  the  disposition  of  a  
pistol belonging to Her Majesty ; 
 
 
        The  Police  v.  Economides  and  others  (l951)  20  C.L.R.,  Part  II,  
page 11, referred to. 
 
 
              (2) that the Supreme Court had power to convict the appellant 
of an offence of which he had been acquitted by the trial Court; 
 
 
        Police  v.  Savva  (l929)  14  C.L.R.  11;  and  Police  v.  Moustafa 
Hassan  Ouzoun  Mehmed  (unreported)  Criminal  Appeal  No.  2008,  
decided on Sept. 30, 1955, followed; R. v. Melvin and another (1953) l 
All E.R.294 distinguished. 
 

 
 
2
1957 
    March 22,26 
_________ 
ANDREAS 
KLEANTHOUS 
HAJI 
GEORGHIOU 
v. 
THE 
POLICE
 
Decision of trial Court varied accordingly. 
       Cases referred to: 
       (1) Police v. Economides and others (1951) 20 C.L.R., Part  II, 11. 
       (2) Police v. Savva (l929) 14 C.L.R. 11. 
       (3) Police v. Mustafa Hassan Ouzoun Mehmed (un-reported) Cr. 
            Appeal No. 2008, decided on Sept. 30, 1955. 
       (4) R. v. Melvin and another (1953) 1 .All E.R. 294. 
 
 
 
Appeal against conviction. 
       The appellant was convicted at the Special Court of Nicosia (Case 
No.  238/57)  on  the  15th  February,  1957,  of  the  offence  of  inciting  a  
soldier  unlawfully  to  take  upon  himself  the  disposition  of  a  pistol  
belonging  to  Her  Majesty,  and  was  sentenced  by  Ellison,  Special  
Justice, to eighteen months' imprisonment. 
 
 
 Lefkos Clerides for the appellant. 
H. Gosling for the respondents. 
 
 
        The  facts  of  this  case  sufficiently  appear  in  the  judgment  of  the  
Court which was delivered by:- 
 
 
                ZEKIA,  J.:  The  accused,  a  young  man  of  22,  employed  as  a  
worker in the Tunisia Military camp, had asked on the 12
th
 December 
last,  a  certain  soldier,  Evans,  stationed  as  a  guardsman  in  the  said  
camp,  to  get  him  a  pistol.  The  following  day  the  accused  entered  the  
tent  within  the  camp  with  a  view  to  obtaining  a  pistol.  The  prisoner  
offered £1 for a pistol produced to him which he tested but declined to 
take  delivery  of  it  on  the  spot.  He  asked  the  soldier  to  take  it  for  him  
outside the camp. The solider asked for £3 and insisted on handing the 
weapon over to him in the tent ; the .prisoner did not agree to this and 
the  transaction  was  dropped  there  and  then.  The  prisoner  on  leaving  
the tent was arrested. 
 
 
         Before the trial Court the accused was charged on three counts: 
 
        (1) Inciting Evans unlawfully to take upon himself the disposition 
of a pistol, property of Her Majesty ; 
 
        (2) Inciting him, the said Evans, to steal a pistol; and 
       (3) Inciting for the transfer of a pistol contrary to section 9 of the 
Firearms Law, Cap. 86. 
 
  
 

 
 
3
        The trial Court found the accused guilty on count 1 and not guilty 
on the remaining two counts. 
 
        The grounds of appeal were three: 
 
              (1)  The  verdict  of  guilty  on  count  1  was  not  supported    by  
evidence.  The  words  used  by  the  accused  "get  me  a  pistol"  
could not amount to an incitement to witness Evans for taking 
upon  himself  the  disposition  of  a  pistol,  property  of  Her  
Majesty. 
              (2)  Appellant  having  never  asked  Evans  to  become  the  unlawful  
receiver of a pistol he could not be found guilty for inciting him 
to do so. 
              (3)  Once  appellant  was  acquitted  on  the  second  count,  that  is,  
inciting Evans to steal a pistol, he ought to have been acquitted 
also on count 1. 
 
1957 
    March 22,26 
_________ 
ANDREAS 
KLEANTHOUS 
HAJI 
GEORGHIOU 
v. 
THE 
POLICE 
        From the judgment of the Court it appears that the evidence of the 
main  witness,  Evans,  was  accepted  as  true  and  that  it  was  amply  
corroborated by other witnesses. The suggestion-on by the defence that 
it was a put-up-case by prosecution's main witness was rejected by the 
trial Court. There was evidence for the facts which we outlined at the 
beginning of our judgment and which the Court believed. 
 
 
        The point which falls for decision in the first place is whether the 
evidence  accepted  by  the  trial  Court  can  support  a  conviction  for  
inciting  soldier  Evans  unlawfully  to  take  upon  himself  the  disposition  
of a pistol belonging to Her Majesty. The phrase "to take upon himself 
the disposition " has been judicially interpreted by this Court in Police 
v. Michael Nicolaou Economides and others (1951) 20 C.L.R., part II, 
page 11, and in that case it has been decided that this phrase does not 
create an offence distinct from the offence of receiving stolen property 
and  evidence  to  support  the  former  should  be  the  same  in  the  latter  
case.  There  was  no  evidence  before  the  trial  Court  that  the  appellant  
incited Evans to receive a pistol unlawfully, because as far as Evans is 
concerned  he  being  a  person  in  the  military  service  he  might  come  to  
possess a pistol. Not necessarily by unlawful means or as receiver. We 
think,  therefore,  that  the  conviction  by  the  trial  Court  on  this  count  
cannot stand. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       There remains, however, to see whether on the evidence accepted 
the  prisoner  did  not  commit  an  offence.  In  our  view  on  the  evidence  
accepted  the  appellant  committed  an  offence  under  count  2,  of  which  
he has been acquitted by the trial Court. There was one possible verdict 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4
1957 
    March 22,26 
_________ 
ANDREAS 
KLEANTHOUS 
HAJI 
GEORGHIOU 
v. 
THE 
POLICE
 
in  this  case  and  it  was  the  one  of  which  he  has  been  acquitted.  The  
learned  trial  Judge  appeared  to  have  been  misled  by  the  word"  
disposition"  in  count  1  by  interpreting  it  to  mean  "disposal"  of  a  
firearm.  Indeed  if  the  evidence  is  to  the  effect,  and  there  is  no  doubt  
that it is, that the prisoner tried to persuade Evans, a soldier, to secure 
him a pistol from a military camp this could only be carried out in one 
of the following ways :- 
 
        (a)  Evans  might  steal  a  pistol  within  the  camp  and  pass  it  to  the  
prisoner. 
       (b)   Evans  might come to possess a pistol lawfully as a bailee and 
deliver it to the prisoner. 
       (c)    He  might  secure  the possession  of  a  stolen  pistol  within  the  
camp and give it to the appellant. 
 
 
        It is in evidence that Evans was not carrying a pistol and was not 
in the habit of doing so. We are not in a position to bay whether he was 
authorised  to  carry  one,  if  he  wished  to  do  so,  but  it  is  reasonable  to  
infer that a military serviceman might lawfully become possessor of a 
pistol.  But  assuming  Evans  to  have  come  to  possess  the  pistol  for  the  
purpose  of  delivering  it  to  the  prisoner, not feloniously or unlawfully, 
his parting with the possession to the prisoner would have amounted to 
theft. The incitement involves the commission of theft either before the 
delivery  or  by  the  delivery  of  the  pistol  to  the  prisoner.  if  he  was  
lawfully in possession of this pistol in his capacity as a serviceman he 
was then a b3lilee and as such he would be committing theft within the 
definition of section 249 of the Cyprus Criminal Code. 
 
        This leads us to a consideration of a point of law, namely, whether 
this  Court  has  got  the  power  to  convict  an  appellant  for  an  offence  of  
which he has been acquitted. The relevant section is section 142 (1) (c) 
of the Criminal Procedure Law which reads: 
             " The Supreme Court may set aside the conviction and convict 
the  appellant  of  any  offence  of  which  he  might  have  been  
convicted  by  the  trial  Court  on  the  evidence  which  has  been  
adduced and sentence him accordingly ". 
 
       The  Supreme  Court  in Police  v.  Agathoclis  Savva  (1929)  14  
C.L.R.  11,  at  page  12,  and  in  a  recent  unreported  case  Police  v.  
Mustafa Hassan Ouzoun Mehmed, Criminal Appeal No. 2008
*
decided 
that  this  Court  had  power  to  convict  the  appellant  of  an  offence  of  
which he had been acquitted by the trial Court. We considered also the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
*
 Decided on sept. 30,1955 

 
 
5
case of R. v. Melvin and another  (1953)  1  All  E.R.  294,  where  it  was  
stated  that  under  section  5  (2)  of  the  Criminal  Appeal  Act,  1907,  the  
Court  of  Appeal  had  no  power  to  substitute  a  verdict  of  guilty  of  
breaking and entering and larceny for that of guilty of receiving. In our 
view the present case is distinguishable from the Melvin case. Here, on 
the accepted facts, there could be only one verdict. In Melvin's case the 
jury  by  their  verdict  appeared  to  have  rejected  the  evidence  showing  
that the appellants in that case were the persons who broke and entered 
into the premises and committed the theft. 
 
       For  these  reasons  we  are  of  opinion  that  the  conviction  and  
sentence  on  count  1  should  be  set  aside  and  a  conviction  on  count  2  
should  be  entered  with  six  months'  imprisonment  from  the  date  of  
conviction. 
 
Conviction and sentence on count 1 set aside. 
Accused convicted on count 2 and sentenced to 
six months' imprisonment. 
 
1957 
    March 22,26 
_________ 
ANDREAS 
KLEANTHOUS 
HAJI 
GEORGHIOU 
v. 
THE 
POLICE 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 