

 
 
1
                                                            [ZEKIA                                                            
AND ZANNETIDES JJ.] 
REGINA, 
v. 
HUSSEIN AHMED KOUTCHOUK 
(Criminal Appeal No. 2079.) 
         1957 
    March 2,8  
         ______ 
     
       RRGINA 
             v. 
      HUSSEIN 
        AHMED 
  KOUTCHOUK 
 
Emergency Regulations –– Possessing firearm –– Lawful authority or 
lawful  excuse  ––  Standard  of  proof  required  to  establish  it  ––  
Emergency  Powers  (Public  Safety  and  Order)  Regulations,  1955  
to (No.16) 1956, Regulation 52 (c). 
 
Evidence in criminal cases  ––  Onus of proof on accused –– Standard 
of proof ––  Burden discharged by evidence of probability. 
 
             The  appellant  was  convicted  of  the  offence  of  possessing  a 
revolver without lawful authority contrary to Regulation 52 (c) of 
the  Emergency  Powers  (Public  Safety  and  Order)  Regulations,  
1955 to (No.16) 1956. 
 
              The  appellant  admitted  finding  the  weapon  in  the  road  an 
carrying  it  to  his  house  with  intention  of  delivering  it  to  the  
police.   
              
             Held: (1) that, once possession of a firearm was established the 
burden  of  proof  was  cast  on  the  person  in  possession  to  prove  
either lawful authority or lawful excuse: 
 
             (2)  that  this  burden  may  be  discharged  by  evidence  satisfying 
the  trial  court  of  the  probability  of  that  which  the  accused  was  
called upon to establish: 
 
             R. v. Carr-Briant (1943) K.B. 607, referred to: 
 
             (3) that, having regard to the evidence adduced, the appellant’s 
version was a probable one, and the conviction must accordingly 
be quashed. 
 
Conviction and sentence quashed. 
 
       Cases referred to: 
(1) Wong Pooh Yin v. Public Prosecutor (1954) 3 All E.R.31. 
(2) R. v. Carr-Briant (1943) K.B. 607. 
 

 
 
2
      1957 
    March 2,8  
         ______ 
     
       RRGINA 
             v. 
      HUSSEIN 
        AHMED 
  KOUTCHOUK
 
  Appeal against conviction. 
   
 
       The appellant was convicted at the Special Court of Nicosia (Case 
No.  593/57)  on  the  5
th
  February,  1957,  of  the  offence  of  possessing  a  
revolver  contrary  to  Regulation  52  (c)  of  the  Emergency  Powers  
(Public  Safety  and  Order)  Regulations,  1955  to  (No.16)  of  1956,  and  
was sentenced, by John J., to death. 
 
 
                 O. Orek for appellant 
       M. Griffth-Jones for the Crown. 
 
       The  facts  of  this  case  sufficiently  appear  in  the  judgment  of  the  
Court which was delivered by: –  
 
       ZEKIA,  J.:  This  is  an  appeal  from  the  Special  Court  of  Nicosia  
which on the 5
th
 February, 1957, convicted and sentenced to death the 
appellant for possessing a revolver contrary to Regulation 52 (c) of the 
Emergency  Powers  (Public  Safety  and  Order)  Regulations,  1955  to  
(No.16) of 1956. 
 
 
        The  facts  of  the  case are  as  follows:  The  prisoner  is  o  young  
shepherd, 18 years old, from the village of Mari. On the 3
rd
 December 
last  he  was  grazing  his  flock  out  in  the  fields  and  in  the  evening  
returned  to  his  village  and  after  folding  his  flock  went  home  and  
placed  a  pistol  on  his  bed.  He  was  about  changing  his  clothes,  as  he  
used to do, when his 8 years old brother entered his bedroom, took up 
the  pistol  which  accidentally  went  off  and  wounded  him  in  the  
shoulder.  The  prisoner  at  once  took  his  injured  brother  to  Nicosia  
Hospital  for  treatment  and  it  appears  that  he  has  since  completely  
recovered.  The  appellant  on  the  same  day  at  midnight  returned  home  
from  the  hospital.  On  his  arrival  he  found  Police  Superintendent  Ali  
Radji  in  his  house  –  who  was  there  to  enquire  into  accident  –  a  to  
whom  he  related  at  once  that  on  the  previous  afternoon  he  found  a  
pistol  on  the  side  of  an  asphalt  road  and  had  taken  it  home  with  the  
object of delivering it to the Police after folding his flock and changing 
his  clothes,  and  soon  after  spoke  to  the  Superintendent  he  walked  out  
of  the  house  and  came  back  with  the  pistol,  exhibited  in  Court,  and  
immediately handed it over to the Superintendent. 
 
 
        The  prisoner  in  his  account as  to  haw,  when  and  why  he  came  to  
possess  this  pistol  was  consistent  throughout.  In  his  statement  to  the  
police offer he met that night, in his reply to the formal charge and in 
his  evidence  before  the  trial  Court  his  version  was  the  same.  His  
 
 
 
 

 
 
3
evidence  does  not  appear  to  have  been  shaken  at  all.  The  crux  of  the  
case,  as  the  learned  Judge  observed  in  his  summing  up,  was  whether  
the prisoner came to possess this pistol with an intention to deliver it to 
the  Police.  On  this  crucial  point  the  trial  Court  found  against  the  
appellant for reasons stated in its judgment which was proceed to read: 
 
             “The  whole  of  this  case  is  one  of  actual  facts,  and  depends  
solely if the story of the accused is believed, i.e. that he intended 
to hand over Exhibit 1 to the Police. I do not accept that story as 
true. I am satisfied that, if he did find it and intended to do with it 
as he states, he would have left it on the spot. The excuse he gives 
is so feeble. He says that he could not have left his flock of sheep 
alone. He could have left the gun alone, however. Even though he 
is  illiterate,  he  shows  by  his  own  evidence  that  he  knows  the  
danger attached to bombs, and that such article and weapons must 
be  reported  to  the  police  when  discovered.  I  am  satisfied  that  if  
the  unfortunate  incident  of  his  8-year-old  brother  had  not  taken  
place  Exhibit  1  would  never  have  come  into  the  hands  of  the  
police on the 4.12.56. I find the charge proved against the accused 
as stated on the information. I find you guilty.” 
        1957 
      March 2,8  
         ______ 
     
       REGINA 
             v. 
      HUSSEIN 
        AHMED 
 KOUTCHOUK
 
  
       The  grounds  of  appeal  on  facts  are  reducible  to  one,  namely,  that  
the  verdict  is  unreasonable.  On  a  question  of  law,  grounds  2  and  3  
might be taken together. We propose to deal first with the grounds of 
appeal on a question of law: Ground 1 is “that the evidence adduced on 
behalf  of  the  Prosecution  does  not  in  law  amount  to  possession.”  We  
think this ground cannot stand. The prisoner admitted finding the pistol 
and  carrying  it  to  his  house.  He  later  in  the  day  produced  it  to  the  
Police. The evidence no doubt constitutes possession of a fire-arm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        Grounds 2 and 3 relate to the failure of the trial Judge to take into 
account  what  has  been  submitted  by  the  learned  Counsel  of  the  
Prosecution  in  his  opening  address  in  favour  of  the  prisoner.  This  is  
what  the  Prosecuting  Counsel  stated  in  his  opening  according  to  
transcript note: 
             “My  Lord,  I  think  it  would  be  evident  that  what  happened  on  
the evening in question agreed with the story told by the accused 
and there is no reason to doubt it. He was grazing his flock when 
he  came  upon  a  pistol  which  will  be  produced  in  evidence  and  
very foolishly he picked it up and put it in his pocket. 
             When  he  returned home  that  evening  he  put  the  pistol  on  his  
bed whilst he was changing his clothes and he says, and I have no 
reason to doubt his word, that it was his intention to deliver it to 
the police.” 
 

 
 
4
     1957 
    March 2,8  
         ______ 
     
       REGINA 
             v. 
      HUSSEIN 
        AHMED 
  KOUTCHOUK
 
       It is true that the trial Court did not refer to these statements in is 
summing  up  but  evidently  refused  to  share  the  view  taken  by  the  
Prosecution. From the opening address the Prosecution appears to have 
held the view that the picking up of the pistol by the prisoner with an 
intention to carry it to the Police could not amount to a lawful excuse 
for possessing it. This is clear from his words “very foolishly picked it 
up  and  put  it  in  his  pocket”,  in  the  passage  just  quoted  from  the  
opening. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       By  the  3
rd
  ground  of  appeal  it  is  contended  that  this  statement  in  
the  opening  speech  prejudiced  the  defence  inasmuch  as  it  was  not  
expected  from  the  Court  to  reject  something  favoourbale  to  the  
prisoner  which  the  Prosecution  had  accepted  in  advance.  The  defence  
thought their case was simply to persuade the Court that the picking up 
of the pistol with the object of delivering it to the Police would amount 
to a lawful excuse. They did not think the intention of the prisoner to 
do  so  was  disputed.  It  is  very  unusual  for  a  trial  Court  to  reject  a  
favourable  view  taken  by  the  Prosecution,  on  facts,  and  inferences  
agreeable  to  the  Defence  in  opening  address  –  especially  when  such  
statement  of  facts  remain  uncontradicted  and  unaffected  by  evidence  
adduced up to the end of the trial – unless there is a strong reason for 
the  Court  to  find  such  views  unacceptable.  However,  it  is  a  different  
matter  to  accede  to  a  proposition  that  in  the  circumstances  the  Court  
was  wrong  in  law.  We  don’t  think,  therefore,  that  what  the  Court  did  
amounts to a misdirection or that even if the defence was prejudiced by 
an  unexpected  adverse  finding  by  the  Court  due  to  the  statements  in  
the  opening  speech,  this  could  mount  to  a  miscarriage  of  justice.  We  
think, therefore, that Ground 3 should also fail. 
 
              We  pass  now  to  the  main  ground  of  appeal,  namely  whether  to  
conviction  in  this  case  should  be  set  aside  on  the  ground  that  it  was,  
having  regard  to  the  evidence  adduced,  unreasonable  in  accordance  
with section 142 (1) (b) of the Criminal Procedure Law. 
 
 
        The  offence  under  review  is  committed  when  a  person  is  in  
possession  of  a  firearm,  without  authority  and  lawful  excuse.  Once  
possession  of  a  firearm  is  established  the  onus  is  cat  on  the  person  in  
possession to prove either lawful authority or lawful excuse. In dealing 
with  such  phrases  –  lawful    authority  and  excuse  –  in  a  similar  
legislation in Malaya – Malaya Emergency  Regulations,  1951,  Reg.  4  
as  amended  by  the  Emergency  (Amendment  No.  11)  Regulations,  
1952,  reg.2  –  Lord  Macdermott  in  giving  the  judgment  of  the  Privy  
Council in the case Wong Pooh Yin v. Public Prosecutor (1954) 3 All 
E.R. 32, at p.34 said :–  
 

 
 
5
              “Their Lordship doubt if it is possible to define the expression 
“lawful  excuse”  in  a  comprehensive  and  satisfactory  manner  and  
they  do  not  propose  to  make  the  attempt.  They  agree  with  the  
Court of Appeal that it would be undesirable to do so, and that each 
case  requires  to  be  examined  on  its  individual  facts.  There  are,  
however, two general conclusions on the contraction and effect of 
the regulation which are relevant to such an examination and which 
may  be  appropriately  stated  at  this  point.  The  first  of  these  is  that  
the   defence   of   “lawful   excuse”   may   be   sufficiently   proved   
although  no  “lawful  authority”  exists  for  doing  what  is  charged  
against  the  accused.  The  terms  of  Reg.  4(1)  clearly  contemplate  
this and, accordingly, make “lawful excuse” an expression of wider 
import  than  “lawful  authority”,  as  defined  in  Reg.  4(2)  (which  
enumerates   the   person   who   have   “lawful   authority”   for   the   
purposes  of  Reg.4).  It  follows  from  this  that,  in  proving  a  “lawful  
excuse”, which falls short of “lawful authority”, it is the excuse or 
exculpatory  reason  put  forward  by  the  accused,  rather  than  the  
carrying, possession or control of the firearm, that must be shown 
to be lawful. And, secondly, it is to be noted that Reg. 4(1) does not 
call for any special intent on the part of the accused.” 
 
       1957 
    March 2,8  
         ______ 
     
       REGINA 
             v. 
      HUSSEIN 
        AHMED 
  KOUTCHOUK
 
        Further down in page 35: 
              While  they  apprehended  that  every  overt  act  by  an  accused 
person  may  not  suffice  to  make  the  defence  of  “lawful  excuse”  
available,  they  think  it  undesirable  to  decide  this  particular  matter  
in advance of an instance which makes such a decision necessary. 
The latitude of the expression under discussion, the infinite variety 
of  circumstances  in  relation  to  which  it  may  be  invoked,  the  
tendency  in  this  field  to  confusion  between  considerations  of  
relevance and weight, and the difficulty which may be experienced 
in  isolating  the  conduct  of  an  accused  person  from  the  impact  of  
external  events,  are  but  some  of  the  reasons  for  leaving  this  
question  until  it  can  be  settled  in  the  light  of  a  situation  that  
demands an answer.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
        As to the discharge of the onus cast on the person in possession of 
a  firearm  to  prove  lawful  excuse  we  may  usefully  refer  to  the  
concluding passes in the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal in 
the case of  R. v. Carr-Briant (1943) K.B. 607, at page 612: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             “In  our  judgment,  in  any  case  where,  either  by  statute  or  at 
common law, some matter is presumed against an accused person 
“unless the contrary is proved”, the jury should be directed that it 
is  for  them  to  decide  whether  the  contrary  is  proved,  that  the  
 

 
 
6
      1957 
    March 2,8  
         ______ 
     
       REGINA 
             v. 
      HUSSEIN 
        AHMED 
  KOUTCHOUK
 
burden of proof required is less than that required at the hands of 
the  prosecution  in  proving  the  case  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt,  
and that the burden may be discharged by evidence satisfying the 
jury of the probability of that which the accused is called upon to 
establish.” 
 
              From  the  excerpts  of  the  above  authorities  it  follows  that  the  
appellant  in  order  to  succeed  in  his  defence,  had  to  satisfy  the  trial  
Court  that  his  excuse  of  his  exculpatory  reason  for  possessing  the  
weapon,  in  order  words  his  version  as  to  why  he  came  to  possess  the  
pistol in the afternoon of the 3
rd
 December last, was a probable one. 
 
                It  is  difficult  to  dispute  the  story  of  the  appellant  as  to  how  and  
when  he  came  to  possess  this  pistol.  The  charge  relates  to  the  
possession on the 3
rd
 December. There was no evidence to indicate or 
reason to suggest that the appellant had this weapon in his possession 
earlier  than  the  day  of  its  delivery  to  the  police.  On  the  contrary  the  
evidence of the prisoner that he came to possess this pistol on the day 
of its delivery stands uncontradicted and even unchallenged. Likewise 
his account on oath that he picked it up from the side of the road in the 
afternoon of the same day, in the absence of an adequate, sound reason 
for its not being believed, is entitled to credit. Moreover Prosecution of 
the Forensic Laboratory, who examined the weapon, found that it was 
subjected  to  climatic  changes  and  certain  amount  of  rustiness  existed  
on it. This is not inconsistent with the weapon being found in the open. 
 
 
                In  this  case  the  gravamen  against  the  prisoner  as  it  appears  from  
the passage quoted from the judgment of the learned trial judge is the 
picking up of the pistol from the ground. In his words. 
             “if he did find it and intended to do with as he states he would 
have left it on the spot. The excuse he gives is so feeble.” 
 
 
 
 
         
       In the opinion of the trial Court if a pistol is found on the ground 
and is picked up and carried away, an alleged intention on the part of 
the  finder  to  deliver  it  to  the  police  could  not  possibly  be  accepted,  
since  such  a  conduct  is  not  susceptible  of  such  an  explanation.  The  
Court  below  in  reaching  this  conclusion  and  for  not  satisfying  itself  
that  the  prisoner  had  a  lawful  excuse,  relied  almost  entirely  on  this  
argument. The multiple circumstances which might present themselves 
in consideration for a defence of lawful excuse in cases like this were 
alluded  to  in  the  judgment  of  the  Privy  Council  we  cited  earlier.  It  is  
unsafe to come to a conclusion on a crucial point in the case by relying 
only on such an argument. 
 
 

 
 
7
        We  are  unable  to  subscribe  to  the  view  taken  by  the  Court  in  
interpreting  acts  and  conduct  of  the  accused,  and  for  doing  so  we  
propose to give briefly our reasons. It is not clear from the summing up 
wjether  the  learned  Judge  directed  himself  correctly  as  the  burden  of  
proof  required  to  satisfy  himself  for  the  existence  of  lawful  excuse.  
However: –  
 
             1957 
March 2,8      
______       
REGINA 
             v. 
      HUSSEIN 
        AHMED 
  KOUTCHOUK
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) The version of the appellant as to why he picked up 
the  pistol  and  carried  it  home  is  not  improbable  in  
itself.  There  is  nothing  in  the  evidence,  and  indeed  
nothing  in  the  summing  up,  to  indicate  that  the  
account   given   by   the   accused   was   discarded   
because  by  his  demeanour  in  Court  of  for  same  
other   reason   demonstrated   he   was   giving   false   
evidence.  So  far  as  the  judgment  goes  the  verdict  
was  based  on  an  inference  of  fact  to  which  we  
already referred. A young shepherd  boy  of  18  who  
is  described  by  the  prosecution  as  perfectly  honest  
and  who  does  not  appear  to  have  been  involved  in  
any way in acts of violence and on the contrary by 
his past conduct he showed how anxious he was to 
assist the police in the find of bombs (this is a fact 
which  transpired  in  the  evidence)  might  very  well  
collect  a  pistol  he  comes  across  on  the  side  of  the  
road  in  order  to  hand  over  the  same  to  security  
authorities.  A  bit  of  encouragement  given  on  the  
occasion   of   the   find   of   the   bombs   plus   the   
expectation  of  a  small  reward  might  easily  have  
tempted  this  uneducated  country  boy  to  collect  the  
pistol  for  giving  it  to  the  police.  The  removal  of  a  
bomb cannot be compared with the picking up of o 
pistol  and  the  argument  that  the  prisoner  ought  to  
have left the pistol on the ground, in the same way 
as the bomb was left on the site if his intention was 
not  to  jeep  the  pistol  for  himself,  in  our  view  is  a  
very unconvincing one. 
 
 
(ii) The  learned  counsel  for  the  prosecution  in  his  
opening,  as  well  as  the  investigation  officer  in  his  
evidence  in  the  trial,  sated  clearly  that  they  had  no  
reason to doubt the word of the prisoner that he had 
intended  to  deliver  it  to  the  police.  The  Court  was  
not  justified  in  the  circumstances  of  the  case  to  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
     
 

 
 
8
         1957 
    March 2,8  
         ______ 
     
       REGINA 
             v. 
      HUSSEIN 
        AHMED 
  KOUTCHOUK
 
overlook or treat Prosecution’s view as unworthy of 
consideration. 
 
(iii) Finally   his   conduct   in   promptly   delivering   the   
pistol  to  the  police  and  concealing  nothing  as  to  
how  the  incident  of  the  wounding  of  his  younger  
brother  had  occurred  earlier  in  the  evening  is  a  
point   which   might   reasonably   be   taken   in   his   
favour. 
 
        We are of opinion therefore that the conviction in this case cannot 
stand  and  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  on  the  last  ground.  
Conviction and sentence are quashed accordingly. 
 
Conviction and sentence quashed. 
 
   
 
   
 