

 
 
1
 
                                                            [ZEKIA                                                            
AND ZANNETIDES JJ.] 
EKATERINI  LYMPEROPOULOU, 
Appellant, 
AND 
MICHALAKIS CHRISTODOULOU AND OTHERS, 
Respondents. 
(Civil Appeal No. 4228) 
___________________ 
 
1957 
Oct. 9, 
Nov. 5 
_______ 
EKATERINI 
LYMPEROPOLOU 
v. 
MICHALAKIS 
CHRISTODOULOU  
AND OTHERS. 
 
 
Fraudulent  Transfer––Transfer  of  goods––Invalid  against  a  creditor  
intended to be defrauded––" Subsequent creditors " not protected 
––Fraudulent  Transfers  Avoidance  Law,  Cap.  95,  sections  2,  3  
and 5. 
 
 
              On the 1
st
 April, 1955, the first respondent sold and transferred 
his goods to his mother, the second respondent. In August, 1956, 
mother and son formed a company (the third respondent) and had 
one  share  of  £1  allotted  to  the  son  (the  first  respondent)  and  997  
shares to the mother (the second respondent). 
 
 
              The  first  respondent  became  engaged  to  the  appellant  on  the 
27
th
  March,  1955,  and  he  broke  his  engagement  in  December,  
1955.  In  July,  1956,  the  appellant  obtained  judgment  against  the  
first  respondent  in  the  Ecc1esiastical  Court,  and  in  February,  
1957,  she  obtained  judgment  against  him  in  the  District  Court.  
The  first  respondent  paid  nothing  against  the  judgment  debt  and  
left Cyprus some three weeks later. 
 
 
              On   an   application   to   set   aside   the   transfer   of   the   first 
respondent's goods as being fraudulent, the trial Court found that 
the agreement of the 1st April, 1955, was made with a fraudulent 
intent  to  delay  or  hinder  the  creditors  of  the  first  respondent,  but  
held  that  on  the  date  of  the  transfer  the  appellant  was  not  a  
creditor   within   the   meaning   of   section   2   of   the   Fraudulent   
Transfers    Avoidance    Law,    Cap.    95,    and    dismissed    her    
application. 
 
 
              On appeal, 
 
 
 
 
 
             Held (upholding the decision of the trial Court): 
 
 

 
 
2
1957 
Oct. 9, 
Nov. 5 
_______ 
EKATERINI 
LYMPEROPOLOU 
v. 
MICHALAKIS 
CHRISTODOULOU  
AND OTHERS. 
 
              (1) that a fraudulent disposition was invalid against a creditor 
or creditors whom the transferor and transferee intended to binder 
or  delay;  and  that  a  fraudulent  transfer  could  only  be  avoided  
under  the  provisions  of  section  3  (1)  of  the  Fraudulent  Transfers  
Avoidance  Law,  Cap.  95,  if  the  creditor  who  applied  for  such  
avoidance was one who was intended at the time of the transfer to 
be delayed or hindered in recovering his debt from the transferor; 
 
              (2) that, unlike the English statutes (13 Eliz. C. 5 and the Law 
of  Property  Act,  1925),  the  Cyprus  statute  did  not  provide  a  
remedy for a " subsequent creditor," i.e. a creditor who was not in 
the  contemplation  of  the  debtor  at  the  time  of  the  fraudulent  
transfer;  
 
 
              (3) that the appellant was not and could not be a creditor in the 
contemplation of the first respondent when the fraudulent transfer 
was effected in April, 1955 ; and that, therefore, the appellant was 
not  a  creditor  within  the  meaning  of  sections  2  and  3  of  the  
Fraudulent  Transfers  Avoidance  Law,  Cap.  95,  and  she  was  not  
entitled to avoid the transfer; and 
 
 
              (4)  that  the  common  law  and  doctrines  of  equity  were  not  
applicable to the present case. 
 
 
 
             Appeal dismissed. 
 
 
 Cases referred to: 
       (1) Graham v. Furber (1854) 14 C.B. 416. 
       (2) The  Universal  Advertising  and  Publishing  Agency  v. Vouros 
(1952) 19 C.L.R. 87. 
       (3) Myrianthousis v. Petrou (1956) 21 C.L.R. 32. 
 
 
 
Appeal. 
       The appellant appealed against the dismissal of her application by 
the  Full  District  Court  of  Limass91  (Zenon  P.D.C.  and  Kacathimis  
D.J.), dated 18
th
  June, 1957 (Action No. 1571/56), seeking to set aside 
the  transfer  of  the  first  respondent's  goods  in  order  to  make  them  
available for seizure in satisfaction of a writ of movables issued by the 
appellant against the first respondent. 
 
 
        Chr.  itsides and G. Pelaghias for the appellant. 
       A. Mavrommatis and T. Papadopoulos for the respondent. 
 
 

 
 
3
        The  facts  sufficiently  appear  in  the  judgment  of  the  Court  which  
was delivered by : 
 
       ZEKIA  J.:  This  is  an  appeal  from  the  dismissal  of  appellant’s  
application  seeking  to  set  aside  the  transfer  or  disposal  of  goods  in  a  
chemist's shop situate at Hellas Street, Limassol, registered in the name 
of  A.  Christodoulou  Ltd.,  Respondent  No.  3,  in  order  to  make  the  
furniture  and  "Stock-in-trade  in  the  said  shop  available  for  seizure  
under  a  writ  of  movables  issued  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  the  
judgment creditor, against respondent No.1, the judgment debtor. 
 
1957 
Oct. 9, 
Nov. 5 
_______ 
EKATERINI 
LYMPEROPOLOU 
v. 
MICHALAKIS 
CHRISTODOULOU  
AND OTHERS. 
 
        The  application  is  based  on  the  Fraudulent  Transfers  Avoidance  
Law,  Cap.95,  sections  3  and  5.  The  respondent  No.1,  the  judgment  
debtor,  is  the  son  of  respondent  2,  the  mother,  and  respondent  3  is  
purported to be a company formed by respondents 1 and 2.,. . 
 
 
        Respondent  No.  1  leased  the  shop  in  question  early  in  1955  and  
installed  in  it  the  furniture  and  stock-in-trade  which  he  bought  from  a  
certain  Demetriades.  The  pharmacy  was  registered  in  his  name  and  
remained  so  since  the  1
st
  of  April,  1955.  Respondent  No.1  carried  on  
the business of a pharmacist under his name as "Lakis Pharmacy "since 
that  date  until  his  departure  from  Cyprus  on  the  10
th
  March,  1957.  It  
appears  that  on  the  eve  of  his  departure  the  words"  Lakis  Pharmacy"  
were removed from the name-plate and replaced by" A. Christodoulou 
Ltd.".  The  bailiff  who  called  at  this  shop  for  the  purpose  of  levying  
execution shortly after the judgment debtor's departure, on noticing the 
change of the name outside the do or of the shop did not proceed to the 
seizure   but   returned   the   writ   unexecuted.   The   evidence   adduced   
revealed  that  the  mother  (Respondent  No.  2)  by  way  of  advancement  
paid the amount of 1:538 to her said son for the purpose of establishing 
him   in   chemist's   business.   The   mother   in   order   to   make   the   
advancement contracted a loan and mortgaged her immovable property 
to a certain Rogiros on the 2
nd
 March, 1955. It appears that the money 
borrowed could not be paid by the mother and the mortgaged property 
was, in full satisfaction of the mortgaged debt, transferred in the name 
of the mortgagee, Rogiros. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       The  mother  and  son  on the  1st  April,  1955,  entered  into  an  
agreement which has been exhibited in the Court below, its main terms 
being  that  in  consideration  of  the  sum  of  £538,  paid  in  cash  and  a  
promise  to  pay  £100  to  the  original  seller  of  the  shop,  the  furniture,  
stock-in-trade  and  indeed  all  the  goods  in  the  shop  were  sold  to  the  
mother.  The  management  was  to  remain  in  the  hands  of  respondent  
No.1, the son, who would receive a salary of 1:35 per month and that 
 

 
 
4
1957 
Oct. 9, 
Nov. 5 
_______ 
EKATERINI 
LYMPEROPOLOU 
v. 
MICHALAKIS 
CHRISTODOULOU  
AND OTHERS. 
 
the  net  profits  of  the  business  would  go  to  the  mother.  Although  the  
agreement in question states that the sum of 1:538 had been deposited 
by the mother for the purpose of carrying on the business of pharmacy 
it was found that such sum was not deposited for such purpose and this 
sum  could  only  have  reference  to  the  amount  originally  advanced  by  
the  mother  for  establishing  the  son  in  business.  In.  August,  1956,  a  
certificate  of  the  incorporation  was  issued,  the  mother  and  son  being  
the  only  shareholders  of  the  company,  the  son  holding  one  out  of  the  
1.000  shares  of  1:1  each.  .An  allotment  of  997  shares  in  the  name  of  
the mother appears to have been made in February,1957. 
 
        On  the  other  hand,  the judgment  creditor  got  engaged  to  the  
judgment debtor, the son, on the 27th March, 1955. At the date of the 
engagement a contract of dowry was signed and amongst other things 
it was stipulated that if there was a breach of the promise, the innocent 
party  should  be  entitled  to  compensation  not  less  than  £1,000.  In  
December,  1955,  the  engagement  was  broken  by  the  respondent  and  
the   appellant   in   February,   1956,   instituted   proceedings   in   the   
Ecclesiastical  Court  and  on  the  22
nd
  July  in  the  same  year  obtained  a  
judgment  for  £1,400.  There  was  an  appeal  against  this  judgment  to  a  
Superior Ecclesiastical Court, which Court reduced the amount to £381 
by its decision given on the 9
th
 September, 1956. The appellant on the 
17
th
  November,  1956,  brought  action  No.  1571/56  in  the  Civil  Court  
and  a  judgment  by  consent  was  obtained  for  the  bum  of  f:700  on  the  
12
th
  February,  1957,  in  favour  of  the  appellant.  On  the  date  of  the  
consent  judgment  an  arrangement  for  the  payment  of  the  judgment  
debt  was  reached  between  the  parties.  There  would  be  a  stay  of  
execution  up  to  the  6th  March,  1957,  on  which  date  theappellant  was  
to  pay  £125  and  thereafter  £9  monthly.  Nothing  was  paid  on  the  6
th
 
March  or  afterwards    and  on  the  10
th
  March  the  judgment  debtor  left  
Cyprus. On the 11
th
 or 12
th
  March, the bailiff called at the pharmacy in 
order to levy execution under a writ of movables. The shop was found 
closed  and  the  name  of  the  respondent  was  found  removed  and  
replaced, as we said, by the name of the company. 
 
 
                The  Court  found  that  the  agreement  of  the  1
st
  April  1955  was  
made  with  a  fraudulent  intent  to  delay  or  hider  the    creditors  of  the  
respondent  No.1  and that the formation of the company later in 1956 
and the allotment of shares and the change in the name-plate appearing 
outside  the  shop  were  all  fraudulent  acts  for  the  furtherance  of  the  
original object. 
 
 
        The  finding  of  the  Court  below,  is  summarized  in  the  following 
passage: 
 

 
 
5
              "  We  have  no  doubt  in  our  mind  that  Exhibit  9  was  not  a 
genuine transfer and that it was made for the purpose of hindering 
and  delaying  the  creditors  of  Respondent  1,  to  the  knowledge  of  
Respondent  2,  who  was  aware  of  the  debts  of  Respondent  ı 
existing  at  the  time,  and  namely  of  another  debt  of  £300  to  
Rogiros  Theochari  Papadopoullos  of  the  debt  of  £100  to  Mrs.  
Olympia  Erotokritou,  to  which,  according  to  the  evidence  of  
Respondent  1,  she  was  a  guarantor;  of  the  debt  to  Mrs.  Lella  
Rapas,  and,  of  course,  of  the  debt  to  the  seller  of  the  Pharmacy,  
Mr. Demetriades. 
 
1957 
Oct. 9, 
Nov. 5 
_______ 
EKATERINI 
LYMPEROPOLOU 
v. 
MICHALAKIS 
CHRISTODOULOU  
AND OTHERS. 
 
              It  is  also  significant  that  the  Company,  Respondent  3,  was  
formed  after  the  decision  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Court  of  the  First  
Instance, and more significant still, that the allotment of shares in 
favour  of  Respondent  2  in  the  Company,  and  the  declaration  of  
the contract relating to those shares to the Registrar of Companies 
were sent one day after the judgment of this Court was delivered 
against Respondent 1. 
 
 
              The   whole   transaction   regarding   the   pharmacy   between 
Respondent  1  and  Respondent  2,  as  explained  above,  and  their  
demeanour, leaves no doubt in our mind that the transaction was 
made for the sole purpose of defrauding or delaying the creditors 
of Respondent 1.” 
 
 
        On the facts of the case, the Court. having reached the conclusion 
as  above,  proceeded  to  examine  whether  the  appellant,  the  judgment  
creditor,  could  avail  herself  of  the  provisions  and  procedure  of  the  
Fraudulent  Transfer  Avoidance  Law.  The  Court  having  gone  into  the  
matter  thoroughly  found  that  the  enactment  in  question  does  not  
provide a remedy for a subsequent creditor as the appellant at the time 
of  the  transfer  of  the  pharmacy  in  question,  that  is,  on  the  1
st
  April,  
1955,  was  not  a  creditor  within  the  meaning  of  section  2  of  the  
Fraudulent   Transfers   Avoidance   Law   and   she   was   not   therefore   
entitled to avoid the transfer of the shop and render it liable to seizure 
under a writ of fieri facias. 
 
 
        The grounds of appeal are (l) that the trial Court was erroneous in 
their  decision  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  creditor  within  the  relevant  
law; (2) the words "actually indebted" were misconstrued; (3) that the 
common   law   and   equitable   principles   were   applicable   ;   (4)   the   
appellant  was  a  creditor  at  the  time  of  the  final  conclusion  of  the  
fraudulent transactions within the accepted definition of the said word. 
 
 

 
 
6
1957 
Oct. 9, 
Nov. 5 
_______ 
EKATERINI 
LYMPEROPOLOU 
v. 
MICHALAKIS 
CHRISTODOULOU  
AND OTHERS. 
 
       Section 3 (1) of the Fraudulent Transfers Avoidance Law, Cap. 95, 
is the material part of the law relevant to  the main point in issue : 
 
             "3  (1).  Every  gift,  bale,  pledge,  mortgage  or  other  transfer  or 
disposal  of  any  movable  or  immovable  property  made  by  any  
person with intent to hinder or delay his creditors or any of them 
in  recovering  from  him,  his  or  their  debts  shall  be  deemed  to  be  
fraudulent   and   shall   be   invalid   as   against   such   creditor   or   
creditors   and,   notwithstanding   any   such   gift,   sale,   pledge   
mortgage  or  other  transfer  or  disposal,  the  property  purported  to  
be  transferred  or  otherwise  dealt  with  may  be  seized  and  sold  in  
satisfaction  of  any  judgment  debt  due  from  the  person  making  
such gift, sale, pledge mortgage or other transfer or disposal". 
 
 
        It is clear from this section that a fraudulent disposition is invalid 
against  a  creditor  or  creditors  whom  the  transferor  and  transferee  
intended to hinder or delay. A fraudulent transfer therefore can only be 
avoided   under   this   section   if   the   creditor   who   applies   for   such   
avoidance  was  one  who  was  intended  at  the  time  of  the  transfer  to  be  
delayed  or  hindered  in  recovering  his  debts  from  the  transferor  The  
learned  President  was,  in  our  view,  right  in  holding  that  13  Eliz.  C.  5  
and  the  relevant  sections  of  the  Law  of  Property  Act,  1925,  dealing  
with  fraudulent  conveyances  are  wider  in  scope  from  our  Fraudulent  
Transfers Avoidance Law. Undoubtedly, under the statutory provisions 
of  13  Eliz.  C.  5  and  the  Law  of  Property  Act  of  1925  subsequent  
creditors, that is, those creditors who were not in the contemplation of 
the debtors at the time of the fraudulent transfer could avail themselves 
of  the  provisions  of  these  statutes.  In  13  Eliz.  C.  5,  as  it  has  been  
pointed out by the trial Court, the words used are " to defer, hinder or 
defraud creditors and others " and the word "others" has been held in a 
great number of cases to cover subsequent creditors. 
 
 
        Another  material  variation  between  the  local  legislation  and  the  
English  statutory  provisions  is  to  be  found  in  the  following:  The  
Statute of Elizabeth does not say that the transfer shall be void against 
those  who  are  intended  to  be  delayed  but  against  "  any  creditors  who  
are  or  might  be  delayed"  (Graham  v.  Furber,  (1854),  14  C.B.,  416).  
The words "might be" were taken to bring subsequent creditors within 
the beneficial effect of the statute. In our law we have not got similar 
provisions. Although we had the Fraudulent Transfers Law since 1886 
its sphere of operation was very limited; up to the passing of Law 10 of 
1927 there was a time limit, namely, one year, within which a transfer 
could be impeached by a creditor. 
 
 

 
 
7
        From the statement of the facts in this case it is clear, and we need 
not repeat dates and sequence of events, that the appellant was not and 
could not be a creditor in the contemplation of respondent 1 when the 
fraudulent transfer was effected in April, 1955. The view of the law we 
take on ground 1 renders unnecessary the examination of ground 2. 
 
       As  to  the  3rd  ground,  we  do not  think  that  there  is  room  for  the  
Common Law to be applied in this particular case. The Common Law 
is  applicable  under  section  33  (1)  (c)  of  the  Courts  of  Justice  Law,  
1953,  so  far  as  no  other  provision  has  been  ma  de  by  any  law  of  the  
Colony.  In  Vouro's  case,  19  C.L.R.  87,  passing  off  of  a  business  was  
recognised  as  actionable  in  Cyprus  and  although  there  was  provision  
for civil wrongs generally and for passing off goods in particular it was 
decided that there was no special provision for the passing off business 
and  therefore  Common  Law  could  be  applied.  In  Myrianthousi  v.  
Despina  Petrou,  21  C.L.R.,  p.  32,  a  contract  of  marriage  between  an  
infant girl and an adult was held void and not voidable at the instance 
of the infant as the Common Law regards such contracts. 
 
1957 
Oct. 9, 
Nov. 5 
_______ 
EKATERINI 
LYMPEROPOLOU 
v. 
MICHALAKIS 
CHRISTODOULOU  
AND OTHERS. 
 
        In  our  view,  the  local  legislative  authority  has  made  provisions  
relating   to   this   particular   subject   matter,   the   avoidability   of   the   
fraudulent transfers, and no room for the Common Law is left. 
 
 
        The  last  ground  of  appeal is  the  transfer  of  the  pharmacy  to  a  
company  which  was  also  found  to  be  fraudulent.  The  transferor,  
however, is not the judgment debtor but is his mother and whether the 
formation of the company and the allotment of shares are cancelled or 
not it makes no difference. 
 
 
        Since the main issue in this case was to ascertain the ownership of 
the stock-in-trade of the pharmacy in question and since such property 
had passed to Respondent 2 by a fraudulent  agreement in April, 1955, 
subsequent  fraudulent  acts  touching  the  business  in  question  will  not  
make  the  position  of  the  appellant  any  better  as  far  as  the  Fraudulent  
Transfers A voidance Law is concerned. 
 
 
        We think, therefore, that the appeal should be dismissed. We give 
no costs, 
 
 
 
Appeal dismissed. 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 

 
 
8
  