

 
 
1
 
                                                            (ZEKIA                                                            
AND ZANNETIDES JJ.] 
 
                                         NICOS DROUSHIOTIS,               Appellant, 
AND 
                                           ZENON KYPRIANIDES,         Respondent. 
(Civil Appeal No. 4209). 
1957 
Marc 1 
April 5 
_______ 
NICOS 
DROUSHIOTIS 
v. 
ZENON 
KYPRIANIDES 
 
Civil Wrong––Negligence––Strict liability––Printing machine–– Not a 
dangerous thing within section 48 of the Civil Wrongs Law, Cap. 
9––Child––Licence––Duty of occupier––Allurement to child. 
 
 
              The  appellant,  a  child  aged  12  years  and  10  months,  called  at 
the  printing  office  of  the  respondent  to  ask  for  his  friend  A,  the  
respondent's  grandson  who  was  employed  there.  At  the  time  A  
was  operating  an  electrically  propelled  printing  press  and  the  
appellant stood watching him for, a while. While A was engaged 
in pulling down a lever the appellant, without being noticed by A, 
inserted  his  hand  in  the  press  in  order  to  straighten  a  sheet  of  
paper which got out of line, but in doing so his hand was caught 
in the machine and injured. 
 
 
              Held:  (1)  that  a  printing  machine  was  not  a  dangerous  thing  
within the meaning of section 48 of the Civil Wrongs Law, Cap. 
9; 
 
 
              (2) that the respondent's printing machine was not a concealed 
danger or trap, and that there was no duty east on him as occupier 
of the premises to look after the safety of a child licensee against 
an eventuality which could not reasonably be foreseen; 
 
 
              (3)  that  the  printing  machine  was  not  an  allurement  to  a  child 
of the appellant's age; and 
 
 
              (4) that, consequently, the respondent could not be said to have 
been  negligent  or  to  have  failed  to  perform  his  duty  as  occupier,  
and the appeal must be dismissed. 
 
 
        Morley v. Staffordshire County Council (1939) 4 Al E.R. 94;  
 
        Latham  v.  R.  Johnson  &  Nephew  Ltd.  (1913)  1  K.B.  411  ;  and  
Dyer  v.  Ilfracombe  Urban  District  Council  (1956)  1  All  E.R.  581,  
referred to. 
       Appeal dismissed. 
 

 
 
2
1957 
Marc 1 
April 5 
_______ 
NICOS 
DROUSHIOTIS 
v. 
ZENON 
KYPRIANIDES
 
Appeal. 
       Appeal  from  the  judgment  of  the  District  Court  of  Limassol  
(Zenon  P.D.C.)  dated  the  31
st
  December,  1956  (Action  No.  720/56),  
dismissing a claim for damages by the appellant for injuries sustained 
by him through the alleged negligence of the respondent. 
 
       M. Houry for the appellant. 
       A. Anastassiades for the respondent. 
 
        The judgment of the Court was delivered by: 
 
 
        ZEKIA, J. : This is an appeal from the District Court of Limassol 
dismissing a claim for damages by the appellant for injuries sustained 
by him through the alleged negligence of the respondent. 
 
 
        The facts of the case are shortly as follows:- 
 
       The  appellant  is  a minor  born  in  May,  1943,  and  was  a  pupil  
attending  the  third  form  of  a  secondary  school,  the  Commercial  
Academy  of  Limassol,  at  the  time  of  the  accident,  which  occurred  on  
the  9th  March,  1956.  Late  in  the  morning  of  that  day  he  visited  the  
printing office of the respondent, Mr. Kyprianides, an old man of. 80, 
with  a  view  to  asking  his  friend  Andrikkos,  the  grandson  of  the  
respondent,  to  walk  home  together.   The   said   Andrikkos   was   an   
employee  of  the  respondent  and  was  operating  the  printing  machine  
when  the  appellant  entered  the  printing  office.  The  said  machine  is  
electrically  propelled  and  its  printing  part  consists  of  two  steel  plates,  
upper  and  lower,  and  the  print  is  in  the  lower  plate.  The  upper  plate  
moves  up  and  down  at  such  a  speed  as  to  allow  the  operator  who  
works  the  machine  to  pick  up  and  place  on  the  plates  with  his  right  
hand  the  blank  sheets  and  remove  with  his  left  hand  the  same,  after  
being  printed,  to  a  place  on  his  left.  The  machine  is  designed  to  be  
operated by a single person; and a second man cannot render assistance 
to  the  operator.  It  possesses  two  brakes,  one  of  which  is  capable  of  
completely immobilising the machine immediately it is applied and the 
other by means of a lever slows it down and allows the upper plate to 
approach the lower one within 2 mm. only. This helps when a leaf gets 
astray or crooked on the plates and it is desired to be pulled off without 
being printed. 
 
 
        Appellant  having  entered  the  shop  went  up  near  his  friend,  who  
was working at the printing press, and stood on his right watching him. 
A  sheet  of  paper  got  out  of  position  on  the  plate  and  the  operator  
pulled  the  lever  in  order  to  slow  down  the  machine  and  prevent  the  
 
 
 
 

 
 
3
printing of the paper. Having done this he momentarily turned to look 
to his left at the pile of the printed sheets. He then heard appellant call 
out  "Virgin  Mary".  While  the  operator  was  engaged  in  pulling  down  
the  lever  and  glancing  at  the  pile  of  printed  matter  appellant  had  
inserted his right hand in between the two plates in order to straighten 
the paper which got out of line but, before he was able to withdraw his 
hand,  having  apparently  miscalculated  the  time  taken  by  the  upper  
steel plate in moving down on the lower one, the palm of his hand was 
caught  between  the  two  plates  and  crushed  but  as  the  lever  of  the  
machine  was  pul1ed  down  in  the  meantime  the  plates  did  not  contact  
each  other  and  as  a  result  his  hand  was  not  utterly  smashed.  The  
injuries received partly incapacitated his right hand. 
 
1957 
Marc 1 
April 5 
_______ 
NICOS 
DROUSHIOTIS 
v. 
ZENON 
KYPRIANIDES 
        The learned President of the Court below found that appellant was 
in the premises as a licensee and that it was through his negligence that 
he sustained the injuries described. The respondent, as occupier of the 
premises in which the printing machine was installed and as the owner 
of  the  machine,  was  not  liable  for  the  accident.  Nor  was  the  operator  
found  to  be  negligent  in  allowing  appellant  to  have  access  to  the  
printing  machine;  and,  consequently,  respondent  was  not  responsible  
in his capacity as an employer either. 
 
 
        Appellant's grounds of appeal are two: 
 
       (1) The finding of the trial Court that there was no negligence on 
the  part  of  defendant-respondent  or  the  operator  is  against  the  weight  
of evidence. 
 
       (2)  Appellant's  meddling  with  the  printing  press  did  not  disentitle 
him to claim damages for the injuries he received. 
 
 
        In order to support the appeal it was argued that the printing press 
when in operation was a dangerous thing within the meaning of section 
48  of  the  Civil  Wrongs  Law,  Cap.  9,  and  that  the  onus  was  on  the  
defendant to show that there was no negligence for which he could be 
held  liable  in  connection  with  the  keeping  of  such  dangerous  thing.  
And that respondent failed to discharge this onus. We do not think that 
a printing machine is a dangerous thing within the meaning of section 
48  of  the  Civil  Wrongs  Law.  We  agree  with  the  finding  of  the  trial  
Court. 
 
 
        Charlesworth dealing with this phrase in the second edition on the 
Law of Negligence at p. 227 says :- 
 
 

 
 
4
1957 
Marc 1 
April 5 
_______ 
NICOS 
DROUSHIOTIS 
v. 
ZENON 
KYPRIANIDES
 
             "  The  definition  of '  dangerous  things'  must  therefore  be  such  
as  to  exclude  such  things  as  motor  vehicles,  railway  trains,  
mechanically  propelled  vehicles  and  machinery  of  all  kinds.  
Liability for this depends on negligence ". 
 
       The fly -wheel, the motor and the belts of the machine were cased 
in accordance with the requirements of the Labour Department. There 
was  no  infringement  of  any  statutory  duty.  The  machine  is  not  
inherently   dangerous:   Of   course   machineries   can   be   regarded   
dangerous  within  the  meaning  of  certain  statutes  and  regulations  for  
the purpose of protecting workmen, such as for instance under section 
55 of the Coal Mines Act, 1911, and of the Factories Act, 1937. This is 
not the case, however, in the present action and no question for breach 
of the statutory provisions or regulations arises. 
 
 
        It  was  also  argued  that the  operator  was  acting  negligently  when  
he  turned  his  attention  to  his  left  and  thus  disabled  himself  from  
following   the   movements   of   the   minor   appellant   who   was   in   
immediate  proximity  of  the  printing  press.  Had  he  not  directed  his  
attention elsewhere he would have noticed the minor placing the palm 
of  his  right  hand  between  the  two  plates  and  he  would  then  be  able  
instantly to stop the machine and avert crushing the 'appellant's hand. It 
was further submitted that appellant, owing to his age, might have been 
reasonably  expected  to  intermeddle  with  the  business  of  the  operator  
and the latter was negligent in failing to take the appropriate care and 
precaution. 
 
 
        Section 47 of the Civil Wrongs Law deals with the duty not to be 
negligent.  Sub-section  (1)  (a)  (b)  and  sub-section  (2)  (b)  define  the  
duty  of  an  occupier  to  a  person  who  is  lawfully  in  or  upon  the  
immovable property. The second proviso of sub-section (2) (b) defines 
the  duty  of  an  occupier  of  any  immovable  property  towards  a  bare  
licensee   who   comes   lawfully   upon   his   property.   As   far   as   the   
condition,  the  maintenance  or  repair  of  his  immovable  property  is  
concerned  his  duty  is  restricted  to  warn  a  licensee  of  any  concealed  
danger  or  hidden  peril  which  the  occupier  knew  or  must  be  presumed  
to have known. In accordance with section 47 (2) (b) ".A duty not to be 
negligent shall exist in the following cases, that is to say :––  
(b)  the  occupier  of  any  immovable  property  shall  owe  such  a  duty  to  
all persons who are, and to the owner of any property which is lawfully 
in  or  upon  or  so  near  to  such  immovable  property  as  in  the  usual  
course of things to be affected by the negligence ".  
 
 
 

 
 
5
        There  is  no  doubt  that  a  visitor  of  the  printing  press  is  not  in  the  
usual  course  of  things  likely  to  be  affected  by  the  mode  the  two  steel  
plates of the machine work and also such a machine could not by any 
stretch  of  interpretation  be  regarded  as  a  concealed  danger  or  hidden  
peril or trap for any person, including a boy of the age of the appellant, 
who  walks  into  the  printing  office.  There  was  no  duty  east  on  the  
occupier  and  his  employee  as  an  extraordinary  measure  of  precaution  
to  constantly  watch  the  movements  of  the  entrant  minor  for  an  
eventuality which could not reasonably be foreseen. 
 
1957 
Marc 1 
April 5 
_______ 
NICOS 
DROUSHIOTIS 
v. 
ZENON 
KYPRIANIDES 
        There  remains  to  see  whether  the  said  machine  constitutes  an 
allurement for persons of the age and class of the minor appellant and, 
if so, whether the occupier failed through the conduct of his employee 
or otherwise to take extra care for the visitors of minor age when they 
were  allowed  to  approach  the  machine  in  question.  There  is  no  
evidence  that  the  appellant  was  either  allured  or  attracted  A  by  the  
working of the plates and that as a result he put his hand between the 
two plates. He expressed the purpose for which he did it: He intended 
to straighten a paper which got out of line. It was not his immature age 
that  prompted  him  to  insert  his  hand  but  he  wanted  to  help  his  friend  
the  operator  gratuitously.  He  was  neither  asked  nor  expected  to  do  
what he did. 
 
 
        In Morley  v.  Staffordshire  County  Council  (1939)  4  All  E.R.  94,  
Mackinnon L.J. in dealing with allurement to children said: 
 
 
              "  But  it  is  not  suggested  that  there  was  any  allurement  to  the  
child at all, because there is no evidence of it attracting him in any 
way.  Consequently  I  think  there  is  no  trap  in  that.  There  is  
nothing in the nature of a trap ". 
 
 
        In Latham  v.  R.  Johnson  &  Nephew  Ltd.  (1913)  1  K.B.  411,  
Hamilton, L.J. said: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              "  The  rule  as  to  licensees,  too,  is  that  they  must  take  the 
premises  as  they  find  them  apart  from  concealed  sources  of  
danger; where dangers are obvious they run the risk of them Two 
other  terms  must  be  alluded  to––a  '  trap'  and  'attraction'  or  
'allurement  '.  A  trap  is  a  figure  of  spee.ch,  not  a  formula.  It  
involves the idea of concealment and surprise of an appearance of 
safety  under  circumstances  cloaking  a  reality  of  danger.  Owners  
and occupiers alike expose licensees and visitors to traps on their 
premises at their peril, but a trap is a relative term. In the case of 
an  infant,  there  are  moral  as  well  as  physical  traps.  There  may  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6
1957 
Marc 1 
April 5 
_______ 
NICOS 
DROUSHIOTIS 
v. 
ZENON 
KYPRIANIDES
 
accordingly  be  a  duty  towards  infants  not  merely  not  to  dig  
pitfalls  for  them,  but  not  to  lead  them  into  temptation  Finally,  
what  objects  which  attract  infants  to  their  hurt  are  traps  even  to  
them?    Not  all  objects  with  which  children  hurt  themselves  
simpliciter.  A  child  can  get  into  mischief  and  hurt  itself  with  
anything if it is young enough. In some cases the answer may rest 
with the jury, but it must be matter of law to bay whether a given 
object  can  be  a  trap  in  the  double  sense  of  being  fascinating  and  
fatal. No strict answer has been, or perhaps ever will be, given to 
the question ". 
 
 
                Section  54  of  the  Civil  Wrongs  Law,  which  deals  with  special  
defence  in  cases  where  the  plaintiff  voluntarily  exposed  himself  to  
danger, reads :––  
 
 
              "It shall be a defence to any action brought in respect of a civil 
wrong that the plaintiff knew and appreciated or must be taken to 
have  known  and  appreciated  the  state  of  affairs  causing  the  
damage and voluntarily exposed himself or his property thereto; 
             Provided  that  the  provisions  of  this  section  shall  not  apply  to 
any action brought in respect of any civil wrong when such wrong 
was  due  to  the  non-performance  of  a  duty  imposed  upon  the  
defendant by any enactment: 
             Provided also that no child under the age of twelve years shall 
be deemed to be capable of knowing or appreciating such state of 
affairs  or  of  voluntarily  exposing  himself  thereto  or  of  himself  
exposing his property thereto". 
 
 
        Here the appellant child is over 12 years of age and the trial Court 
found  that  he  was  capable  of  knowing  and  appreciating  .the  risk  to  
which  he  exposed  himself  by  inserting  his  hand  in  between  the  two  
plates.  This  was  an  obvious  danger  and  a  boy  of  his  age  could  easily  
appreciate  the  danger  attending  his  act  and  indeed  his  own  evidence  
supports this; when he was cross-examined he said: 
 
 
              "I  realised  that  it  was  a  dangerous  thing  to  put  one'  s  hand 
between the two moving plates of the press ". 
 
 
                He  had  been  to  the  printing  office  on  previous  occasions.  We  
agree with the learned counsel of the respondent that in the context the 
words  we  quoted  mean  nothing  else  but  that  he  was  in  a  position  to  
appreciate  the  danger  of  placing  his  palm  between  the  two  plates  lest  
his  hand  might  be  caught  in  between.  Reference  was  made  to  various  
authorities  where  victims  of  accidents  were  either  infant  children  or  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7
big  children.  In  Dyer  v.  Ilfracombe  Urban  District  Council  (1956)  1  
All E.R. 581, a child of 4 ½  years failing through the gap between the 
rails  of  a  platform  of  a  soundly  constructed  chute  was  not  found  
entitled to recover damages for injuries received because there was no 
hidden danger and for a child of such age the danger of falling from a 
high  platform  was  an  obvious  one.  We  are  of  the  opinion,  therefore,  
that this appeal should be dismissed. 
 
1957 
Marc 1 
April 5 
_______ 
NICOS 
DROUSHIOTIS 
v. 
ZENON 
KYPRIANIDES 
 
Appeal dismissed. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 