guilty of no negligence at all, she should be put under the imputation of having caused this grievous injury to a fellow-citi- zen, when in fact she has done nothing blameworthy at all.”

Tazminat konusuna gelînce genellikle Bidayet Mahkemelerini.rı tazminat hususunda verdiği karar Istinaf Mahkemesi tarafından tadil edilmez. Ancak Bidayet Mahkemesi genel tazminatı tesbit ederken nazarı itibara alması gereken hususları nazarı itibara almamış ise, veya nazarı itibara almaması gereken hususları nazarı itibara almışsa veya herharıği bir hata işlemişse veya tespit edilen tazminat miktarı aşikâr surette çok yiiksek veya çok düşük ise İstinaf Mahkemesi Bidayet Mahkemesinin kararını tadil edebilir. Bidayet Mahkemesi bir kazazadenin alacağı tazminatı tesbit ederken makul hareket etmesi ve tespit edeceği tazminatın mükemmel tazminat değil de makul tazminat olması gerekir. Tazminatın hem kazazade heın de ihmalkâr şahıs için adalete uygun olması gerekir. Tazminat ihmalkâr şahsı cezalandırır nitelikte olmaması gerekir. Tazminatın makul tazminat olması gerektiği hususunda İngiliz İstinaf mahkemesinde Warren and Another v. King and Others (1963) 3 All E.R. 521'de Harman, L.J., sayfa 528'de şunları söyledı:
"In this class of case, the remedy should not be called damages, for that connotes restitution in integrum, a thing patently impossible when a man has lost a leg or a girl has her spinal cord severed -but 'compensation' fair compensation. Fair as between the negligent person and his victim. Not punishment of him, but what he ought in fairness to pay."

"It seems to me that the first element in assessing such compensation is not to add up items such as loss of pleasures, or earnings, of marriage prospects, of children and so on, but to consider the matter from the other side, what can be done to alleviate the disaster to the victim, what will it cost to enable her to live as tolerably as may be in the circumstances? This will involve, first, an estimate of the infant plaintiff's expectation of life, and next an estimate of the cost of such help as she needs. On neither of these subjects had the jury any guidance here. It is perfectly possible to have an estimate first ef expectation of life, and next of what would be the cost of an annuity over that period. With these two figures estimated, the jury will have at least signposts on the way. I do not say that they are to follow the figures slavishly, but to use them as guides. Nor is this element the only one. Pain and suffering have still to be taken into account. In the instant case, pain is clea.rly not much. Mental suffering is of great importance, and this differentiates it from those where the victim is, or is nearly, unconscious.

A jury uninstructed may remember that K.L.1,000.- invested at five per cent, will produce K.L.5O.- per annum, but, if they wish to provide the victim with (say) K.L.1,000 per annum, they are likely to calculate the capital sum required to do that a more elaborate calculation they cannot be expected to make, but that figure will be wholly erroneous, for it will leave the capital intact at the end of the period, say ten years. Any representative of an insurance company could provided the right figure. Why should not this help be given? In the instant case, the judge did nıake one passing reference to discounting the capital sum awarded, but he did not explain that, on this view, the object would be to exhaust the capital over the period so that nothing was left at the end. This needs expert calculation, and should be the subject of expert evidence. I am left with the strong impression that the capital sum awarded was calculated simply as one which should be its income provide the desired maintenance."

Ayni hususta Lordlar Kamarasında H. West and Son, Ltd., and Another v. Shepha.rd (1963) 2 All E.R. 632, sa.yfa 631'de Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest şunları söyledi:-

"My Lords, the damages which are to be awarded for a tort are those which 'so far as money can compensate, will give the injured party reparation for the wrongful act and for all the natural and direct consequences of the wrongful act' (Admiralty Comrs. v. Susquehanna (Owners), The Susquehanna). The words 'so far as money can compensate' point to the impossibility of equating. money with human suffering or personal deprivations. A money award can be calculated so as to make a good financial loss. Money may be awarded so that something tangible may be procured to replace something else of like nature which has been destroyed or lost. But money cannot renew a physical f rame that has been battered and shattered. All that judges and courts can do is to award sums which must be regarded as giving reasonable compensation. In the process there must be the endeavour to secure some uniformity in the general method of approach. By common assent awards must be reasonable and must be assessed with moderation. Furthermore, it is emminently desirable that so far as possible comparable injuries should be compensated by comparable awards. When all this is said it still must be that amounts which are awarded are to a considerable extent conventional."

sayfa 633 ve 634'de şunları söyledi:
"In assesing damages there may be items which will only be awarded if certain needs of a plaintiff are established a particular plaintiff may have provision made for some future form of transport: a particular plaintiff may have to have provision made for same special future attention or some special treatment or medicatiorı. If, however, some reasonable sum is awarded to a plaintiff as compensation for pain endured or for the loss of past or future earnings or for ruined years of life or lost yeas of life, the use to which a plaintiff puts such sum is a matter for the plaintiff alone. A rich man, merely because he is rich and is not in need, is not to be denied proper compensation; nor is a thrifty man merely because he may keep and not spend."
 

Lord Devlin ise sayfa 636'da şunları söyledi:
"The case raises a fundamental question on the nature of damages for personal injury. There must be compensation for medical expenses incurred and for loss of earnings during recovery; these are easily quantified, whether as special or as geıieral damage. Then there is compensation for pain and suffering both physical and mental. This is at large. It is compensation for pain and suffering actually experienced. Loss of consciousness, however caused, whether by the injury itself or produced by drugs or anaesthetics, means that physical pain is not experienced and so has not to be compensated for; and this must be true also of mental pain. Then there is or may be a temporary or permanent loss of a limb, organ or faculty. Whether it is the limb itself that is lost or the use of it is immaterial. What is to be compensated for is the loss of use and the deprivation thereby occasioned. This deprivation may bring with it three consequences. First, it may result in loss of earnings and they can be calculated. Secondly, it may put the victim to expense in that he has to pay others for doing what he formerly did for himself; and that also can be calculated. Thirdly, it produces loss of enjoyment, loss of amenities as it is sometimes called, a diminution in the full pleasure of living. This is incalculable and at large. This rÎeprivation with its three consequences is something that is personal to the victim. You do not, for instance, put an arbitrary value on the loss of a limb, as is commonly done in an accident insurance policy. You must certain the use to which the limb would have been put, so as to ascertairı what it is of which the victim has actually been deprived." Lord Pearce ise sayfa 643 de şunları söyledi:"If a plaintiff has lost a leg, the court approaches the matter on the basis that he has suffered a serious physical deprivation no matter what his condition or temparament or state of mind may be. That deprivation may also create future economic loss which is added to the assessment. Past and prospective pain and discomfort increase the assessment. If there is loss or amenity apart from the obvious and normal loss inherent in the deprivation of the limb -if for instance, the plaintiff's main interest in life was some sport or hobby from which he will in future be debarred, that too increases the assessment. If there is a particular injury to the nervous system, that also increases the assessment. So too with other personal and subjective matters that fall to be decided in the light of common sense in particular cases. These considerations are not deal with as separate items but are taken into account by the court in fixing one inclusive sum for general damages."

Ayni hususta İngiliz İstinaf Mahkemesinde Fletcher v. Autocar and Transporters Ltd. (1968) 1 All E.R. 726 sayfa 733'de Lord Denning, M.R. şunları söyledi:-

"Whilst I acknowledge the care which the judge devoted to this case, I think that his conclusion was erroneous. In the first place, I think that he has attempted to give a perfect compensation in money, whereas the law says that he should not make that attempt. It is an impossible task. He should give a fair compensation. That was settled ninet years ago by the case of Philips v. London on South West Ry. Co. Dr. Philips was an eminent phisician makin K.L. 6,000 or K.L.7,000 a year.  He was so severely injured in a railway accident that he was reduced to utter hel lessness with every enjoyment of life destroyed. Field.  J., summing up to the jury said:
 in actions for personal injuries of this kind … and it is wrong to attempt to give an equivalent for the injury sustained. I do not mean to say that you must not do it, because you are the masters and are to decide; but I mean that it would operate unjustly, and in saying so I am using qhe language of the great Parke, B., whose opinion was uoted with approval in Rowley's case. Perfect com ensation is hardly possible, and would be unjust. You cannot put the plaintiff back again into his original position.'
                            This direction was approved by Sir Alexander , Cockburn, C.J. , Who added another        
                     reason:
'.. the compensation should be commensurate to the injury sustained. But there are personal injuries for which no pmount of pecuniary damages would afford adequate com ensation, while, on the other hand the attempt to award full compensation in damages might be attended with ruinoğs consequences to defendants. .. . Generally speaking, we agree with the rule as laid down byu Brett, J.,  in Rowley North Western Ry. Co....... that a jury in these cases must not attempt to give damages to the full amount of a perfect compensation for the pencuniary injury, but must take a  reasonable view of the case, and give what they consider under all the circumstances a fair compensation.' "
Those passages were quoted with approval by Lord Devlin in H. West and Son Ltd. v. Shephard, and undoubtedly represent the law. It is true that in these days most defendants are insured and heavy awards do not ruin them; but small insurance companies can be ruined. Some have been. And large companies have to cover the claims by their premiums.  If awardsreach figures which are “daunting” in their immensity, premiums must be increased must be increased all  the way round. The impact spreads through the body politic. Consider also the position of the plaintiff. He is the one person entitled to be compensated. What good does all this money do for the poor plaintiff. He cannot use it all by any means. Halve it. Still he cannot use it in his lifetime. In order to give him fair compensation, I should have thought that he should be given a sum which would ensure that he woald not, within reason, want for anything that money could buy." 
Diplock, L.J. ise sayfa 736'da şunları söyledi:
"It is a platitude that the purpose of compensatory damages in an action for personal injuries is to put the victim in the same position as he would have been if he had not sustained those injuries, so far as money can do this. But money never can do this. The effect of any physical injury is to make the life of the person who sustains it different from what it would otherwise have been. The change may be temporary or permanent; it may be slight or fundamental; but his position can never be the same as it would have been but for the injuries. Even where a consequence of his injuries is to destroy or reduce his ability to earn money, to restore to him by way of damages the money which he would have been able to earn, can put him in the same position as before the injuries only to the extent that he would have spent those earnings otherwise than on himself - as, for instance, in maintaining his wife and dependants or giving it away during his life or on his decease."


sayfa 743'de ise şunları söyledi:-
"The sum awarded ought to be sufficient: first, to provided for the plaintiff's own maintenance in such circumstances as will best ameliorate the discomfort and deprivations he is bound to suffer; secondly to provide for Mrs. Flechter, his only dependant, enough to suppıort her in the same standard for material comfort, living apart from him, as she would have enjoyed had he not been injured; and, thirdly, to provide in addition the proper conventional sum to which the courts apply the label of 'compensation for loss of the amenities of life."
İhmalkârlık davalarında mahkemeler tazminatı tesbit ederken tazminatı iki kısma ayırması gerekir. Birinci kısım davanın duruşmasına kadar geçen müddet zarfında kazazadenin düçar olduğu maddi zarardan ibarettir ki buna özel tazminat denir. İkinc.i kısım tahtinde ise tazminat kazazadenin davanın duruşma gününden sonra düçar olması muhtemel maddi zarar ve kazadan dolayı kazazadenin kaza gününden itibaren çekmiş olduğu ve çekeceği ızdırap ve herhangi bir hayat nimetinden mahrum oluşu için verilir. Birinci kısım tahtinde tazminat kolayca tesbit edilebilir. Çünkü davanın duruşmasına kadar geçen müddet için kazazadenin düçar olduğu herhangi bir maddi zarar mesalâ kazanç kaybı, doktor ve 
klinik masrafı ve, sair masrafları için kat'i şahadet verilebilir. Ancak davanın duruşma gününden sonra meydana gelebilecek olan maddi zarar bazan kolayca tesbit edilemez. Bunun da sebebi kazazadenin istikbalde hakiki maddi zararının ne olacağı hususunda bazı hallerde kat' i şahadet verilemez. Bu hususta ancak spekülâtif şahadet verilebilir. Bu böyle olmakla beraber gerek Kıbrıstaki mahkemeler gerekse İngilteredeki mahkemeler geçmiş içtihat kararlarına istinad ederek bir kazazadenin müstakbel zararının nasıl tesbit edileceği hususunda bazı prensipler vaz etmişlerdir. Bu prensiplerin başlıcası müstakbel kazanç kaybı hakkındadır. Mahkemeler davanın duruşma gününde kazazadenin istikbaldeki senevi kazanç kaybının ne olabileceği hususunu tesbit ederler ve bu senevi kazanç kaybını, kazazadenin istikbaldeki ömrünün ne kadar olacağını, istikbalde hayatta beklenmeyen tehlikeleri, hayatın cilvelerini, kazazadenin yaşını, alacağı tazminatı yekün olarak peşin alacağını göz önünde tutarak uygun bir çoğaltıcı rakamla çarparlar ve müstakbel kazanç kaybı için yekün bir miktar tespit ederler. Çoğaltıcı rakamın ne olacağı her kazazadenin özel durumurıa bağlıdır. Bu çoğaltıcı rakam 15 e kadar herhangi uygun bir rakam olabilir. Bazı hallerde mahkemeler genel tazminatı tesbit ederken genel tazminat başlığı altında nazari itibara .alınması gereken hususlarıiı tümünü birden nazarı itibara alarak yekün bir miktar tazminat olarak tesbit ederler. Bazı hallerde genel tazminat tahtinde verilebilen tazmiıiatı tafsilâtlı olarak belirtirler. Yani bazan genel tazminat altında bir kazazadenin müstakbel kazanç kaybı ve müstakbel bakım masrafı ve diğer masrafları ile çektiği ve çekeceği ıstırap ve haat nimetlerinden mahrum olmasından dolayı verilen tazminat tafsilâtlı olarak belirtilir. Nitekim S. and Another v. Distillers Co. (Biochemicals) Ltd. (1969) 3 All E.R. 1412 davasında Bidayet Mahkemesi hakimi genel tazminatı tesbit ederken 7 3/4 yaşında olan davacının müstakbel kazancının ne olabileceği hususunu ve diğer hususları tesbit etmeyi uygun görmüştür. O davada hakim Hinchcliffe s.1414'de davacının yaralarını şu şekilde belirtmiştir:-
"May I now deal with the two boys. R.S. was born in November 1961, so he is now 7 3/4 years of age. There is almost a complete absence of arms. A single digit protrudes from the right shoulder. He has normal mobility in that he is able to walk, to run, to kick and to climb stairs without difficulty. He can write not very well with his right artifical hand and very well with his left foot. He cannot cut his food. He cannot dress or undress himself. He is dependent on help when he goes to the lavatory or when he is washed or bathed, or when he has to brush his hair. He brushes his teeth by holding the toothbrush in his foot. The nature of the bilateral artificial arms, powered by gas can be seen f rom the agreed photographs."

Ayni davada davacının alacağı tazminat hususunda ise sayfa 1422'de hakim şunları söylemiştir:-

"As to the loss of earning capacity, which is obviously an important matter, here again the court can only speculate what the position is likely to be when R.S. is 18 or 22 years of age. He is a bright boy and obviously more likely to get employment than not, but he is unlikely to earn what he would have done had he not been deformed. The complete absence of arms for a wage or a slary earner is one of the most grievous disabilities. On the other hand, if all goes well ând he 1ands a good job, he should be paid the wage for the job. But I take the view that there must be a substantial loss of earning capacity, certainly in the region of K.L.1,500 a year.

Lastly, there is the deprivation or loss of amenities. - His deprivation must rank very high when compared with other, serious disabilities, if there is any comparison. He has problems of great magnitute. He is conscious of his deformities. 'He has to be trained to use his feet. Trouble at ,puberty is to be expected and those who have the misfortune to suffer from deformities of this kind very often suffer mentally and phychiatrically from time to time. Furthermore; if R.S. should fall behind in his school work emotional disturbances may well take place. Lastly, the pleasures of marriage and parenthood for R:S. are unlikely.
Never can there have been two cases where there are sa many imponderable factors. It is fair to say that the court is asked to speculate on every aspect of damage. If ever there was a case where a broad view should be taken as to what is just and reasanable compensation, this is it. Dexter v. Ellis has been referred to. The · injuries wer very serious but it is a very different case from this. The Court of Appeal increased damages of K.L.19;000 to K.L.26,500. The plaintiff was a boy of 13 yeârs of .ağe who was paralysed from the waist .down., but he had .the full use of his arms and hands, he cöüld feel and work w'rth' them, he had sense of touch; I think this is very icnportant.

In my judgment, a fair and reâsonable sum to award R.S. for general damages is K.L.32.000. Actuarial calculations to which evidence was directed do not disclose a very different figure fröm my finding. I take the S per cent table for reasons that I have given. I take special care at K.L. 250.- a year; annuity value required K.L.3.200. I take the loss of wages at K.L.1,500 a year; annuity valug K.L.10,700 after allowing for Gourley. One gets a total of K.L. 13,900. For loss of amenities includirig an allowance for Millfield and Possum. I award R.S. K.L.18,000.- making a total of K.L.31,900.- It is not so very far away from my global sum.

The third ·check on the figure of K.L.32;00.- is that, if it was invested carefully; it would be sufficient to keep R.S. free from financial worry and would go some way to- wards ameliorating the discomfort and deprivations that he is bound to suf fer."
İngilterede 1969 yılına kadar genel tazminat başlığı altında her hususta verilebilecek tazminatı tafsilâtlı olarak ayırmak gerekmezdi. Mamafih birçok davalarda bütün hususlar hakkında ayrı ayrı tafsilât verilebilirdi. Müstakbel kazanç kaybı için yekün bir miktar tespit etmek mecburiyeti olmamakla beraber, verilen tüm tazminatın makul tazminat olup olmadığı hususunda karar verebilmek içiıi yıllık müstakbel kazanç kaybının ne olabileceği daima tesbit edilirdi. Genel tazminat tahtında muhtelif başlıklar altında tafsilât verilip verilmemesi hususunda İngiliz Yüksek Mahkemesi Waston v. Powles (1967) 3 All E.R. 721, sayfa 723'de Lord Dennznğ M.R. şunları söyledi:
"Every judge, .wherı working out the sum, notes down the item aiıd calculates so much for loss of future earnings; so much for pain ând suffering, and the like: That gives him a startirig ;point; but there are so many uncertainties an intangibles involved that in the end he had to gather all the items together and give a round sum. So I do not agree with counsel for the plaintiff's contention. It is not the judge's duty to divide up the total award into separate items. He may do-so if he thinks it proper and helpful, but it is not his duty to do so.

O davada kazazade 36 yaşında idi ve kazadan dolayı kazazadenin düçar olduğu yaralar ve maddi zarar ziyan sayfa 722'de şu şekilde ifade edilmiştir:-
"He was walking across a pedestrîan crossing in Middlesborough when he was struck by a motor scooter. His back was injured. He was off work for a few weeks. He then went back to light work. At first  his injury was not thought to be serious; but it turned out to be worse than was thought. He suffered pain and was off work from time to time. In February, 1965, as it did not clear up, he had an operation on his back. It appears that the discs had been injured in the accident. He had a laminectomy operation. It did not do much good. He had a lumbar puncture and a disc reinoved; but he did not get much better. He still has a good deal of pain in his legs and in the 'lower part of his back. Ne is unable to dö heavy work. He:  is only able to do light work. His earnings are reduced by K.L.400.a year. It has been suggested he should have another operation. Meanwhile he has to wear a special spinal jacket which relieves the pain.
The judge summarised the case in this way:
'It is abundantly clear to me that his whole life has been changed by this 'unhappy accident and that he has been transformed from an activeman; enjoying his hobbies and
capable of doing quite strenuous work, to a man who is a c,ripple, capable of only doing light work, and who will, for the rest of his days, not be capable of doing heavy work, and who will, even if this further operation is successful, for the rest of his days endure some pain." 
		
		O davada Bidayet Mahkemesi hakimi genel tazminat tahtinde kazazadenin alabileceği zarar ziyanı K.L.8000.- olarak tesbit etmiştir ve tesbit ettiği tazminat hususunda hükmünde ayrı ayrı teferruat vermemiştir. Ayni davada İstinaf Mahkemesinde L.J. Winn tesbit edilen tazminatın makul olup olmadığını teste tabi tutarken Bidayet Mahkemesi hakimi kazazadenin müstakbel kazanç kaybını yekün bir miktar olarak tesbit etmemekle beraber K.L.8000.-nın asgari olarak K.L.4000.-sı, azami olarak da K.L.5000.-sı müstakbel kazanç kaybına atfolunması gerektiği kanaatına vardı ve geri kalanın da çektiği ve çekeceği ızdıraba ve hayat nimetlerinden mahrum oluşuna atfedildiği kanaatına vararak K.L.8000.nın makul tazminat olduğu kanaatına vardı. Lord Winn sayfa 725'de şunları Şöyledi:-
"The judge mûst be supposed to have taken those matters into consideration, and in particular I would like to say that I feel convinced that this judge, with the experience that he has had both on the bench and before he came to the bench in matters of this kind, cannot have proceeded on the footing that K.L.2,000.- was enough for general damages for pain and suffering and loss of amenities. It follows logically that he cannot have taken fiffteen years or any figure near fifteen years as the multiplier which he would apply to the agreed annual loss of K.L.400.Not withstanding what counsel themselves thought fit to agree, the judge still has the responsibility of making his own decision on the matter, paying due regard, of course to the fact that the defendant was prepareıi to treat the matter through his counsel on that footing. It seems to me, therefore, that there is probably a sum of K.L.4,000.or K.L.3,500.- at the minimum K.L.3,000.- to be attributed here, if one has to break up the award, to the general loss of amenities and pain and suffering."

Tazminat davalarında tazminatı tespit etmek için Kıbrısta uygulanan hukuk prensipleri İngilterede uygulanan hukuk prensipleri ile aynidir. Bunun için tazminat tespit edilirken hangi hususların nazarı itibara alınması hususunda İngilterede verilen içtihat kararları bize faydalıdır. Ancak hukuk prensipleri ayni olmakla beraber İngilteredeki hayat standardı, sosyal, ekonomik ve endüstriyel koşulların Kıbrıstaki hayat standardı, sosyal, ekonomik ve endüstriyel koşullar ile ayni olmadığını göz önünde tutmak ve bu hususun üzerinde ehemmiyetle durmak gerekir kanaatındayım. Bu hususta Privy Council huzurunda olan Singh (an infant) _v. Toong Fong Omnibus Co. Ltd. (1964) 3 All E.R.925 sayfa 927'de Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest şunları söyledi:-

"In deciding this appeal, their lordships think that three consideraions may be had in mind; (i) that the law as tothe factors which must be weighed and taken into account in assessing damages is in general the, s,ame as the law in
:
Englan.d; (ii) that the priıiciples governıng and defining the approach of an appellate court that is invited to hold that damages should be increased or reduced are the same as those of the law in England, and (iii) that to the extent to which regard should be had to the range of awards in other cases which are comparable, such cases should as a rule be those which have been determined in the same jurisdiction ·or in a neighbouring locality where similar social,. economic and industrial conditions exist."
Kanaatımca İngiliz mahkemelerinde tespit olunan tazminat miktarları İngiltere’deki hayat standardı, sosyal, ekonomik ve endüstiyel olduğundan Kıbrısa aynen uygulanamaz.  Bunun için yerii mahkemelerde benzeri davalarda tespit olunan tazminat miktarlarının örnek olara:k kullanılması daha uygundur kanaatındayım. Türk tarafındaki mahkemelerin çalışrnalarının uzun geçmişi olmadığı i in Türk mahkemelerinin bu gibi hallerde verilmiş kararları azdır. Ancak Rum tarafındaki Yüksek Mahkemenin hükümleri Türk tarafını bağlamamakla beraber, tazminat hususunda verilerı hükümler sosyal, ekonomik ve endüstriyel koşullar bakımından nazarı itibara alınması gerektiği kanaatindeyim.

Tazminat hususunda İngilterede 1970 yılına kadar mahkemeler Watson v. Powles davasında vaz edilen prensipleri uygulamakta idiler. Ancak 1970'den sonra İngiliz Yüksek Mahkemesinin Smith v. Central Asbestos Co. Ltd. (1971) 3 All E.R.204 davasında verilen hükümderi dolayı Ingiliz Mahkemeleri genel tazmina.t başlığı altında tespit edilen tazminatın hangi hususlarda verildiğini tafsilâtlı belirtmektedir. Bu hususta ayni davada Lord Denning sâyfa 213'de şunları söyledi:
"Before I discuss these, I would say a few words about the severance of items of damage. In Watson v. Powles and Fletcher v. Autocar Transporters Ltd., we discouraged judges from taking the items separately and jus--,adding them up at the end. But since Jefford v. Gee the judges have to itemise the damages in order to calcula.te the interest. This does not mean that the total award is necessarily to go up higher on that account. The total award is still to be one which gives him fair compexısation in money for his injury. Care must be taken to avoid the risk of .overlapping. Thesiger J in this very case had this point in mind. He intimated that a high figure fö_r loss of future earnings might go in reduction of the award for pain and suffering and loss of amenities of life, and he found support for this in the only other asbestosis case which has come before the court: Sales v. Dick Asbestos Insulating Co. Ltd. I think there is a good. deal in this. When a man is stricken with a desease like asbestosis, it must be a comfort to him to know that he is getting full com.pensation for loss of his future earnings. It will do something to relieve his distress on being .	put on liglıt work or put out of action altogether. To that exten' the award for loss of amenities may be reduced."

Nitekim Pove v. Governors of R dal School (1970) l A11 E.R.841 de ağır surette yaralanan 16 1 2 yaşında bir küçüğün alacağı tazminatı mahkeme tespif ederken Bidayet Mahkemesi hakimi genel tazminat başlığı altında küçüğün müstakbel kazanç kaybını, müstakbel bakımı için ihtiyacı olduğu masrafları ve çektiği ve çekeceği ızdırapları ve hayat nimetlerinden mahrum oluşu için alacağı tazminatı tafsilâtlı olarak tesbit etmiştir. Bu usul Mitchell (b his next friend Hazel Doreen) v. Mullholland and Another No:2 1971 2 All E.R. 1205 ve Daish an infant bv his next friend Albert Edward Daish) v. Wauton (1972 1 All E.R.

· Kazazadenin ağır yaalandığı hallerde tazaiinat teşpit ederken en mühim husü's kazazadenin müstakbel kazanç kaybinırı ne olacağı ve kazazadenin bakıma ihtiyacı oiup olmdığı, bakırri için rie kadara ihtiyacı olduğudur. Bunun içın de umumiyetle davacı bu hususlar için şahadet ibraz eder. İstina:f konusu olan davada davacınırı müstâkbel kazancının ne olabileceği hususunda  verilebilecek herhangi bir şahadet davacı çocuk olduğu için kat'i olamaz ancak davacının ailesinin mali, sosyal durumu davacının ailesinin davacının  istikbali hakkında niyetlerinin ne olduğu hususunda şahadet verilebilirdi. Davacının devamlı bakırria ihtiyacı olup olmadığı hususunda ve bu bakım için davacının herhangi birisinin istihdam etmek frıecburiyeti olup olmadığı, böyle bir bakımın kaça mal olabileceği hususunda şahadet verilebilirdi. Maalesef bu davada yukarı.da - bahsettiğim hususlar hakkında herhangi bir şahadet verilmiş değildir. İngilterede istinaf konusu olan dai,ada ' davacınıri aldığı.. yaralaz' tipinde veya davacı kadar. ağır yaralanan birisinin K.L.10,000:- K.L.25,000.- arasında  tazminat aldığı vakidir. Meselâ M. 'v. Lester ' (1966) 1 A1l E.R. 207 davasında, 17 yaşında olan ve beyninen âğır yarâlandığı için hiçbir zaman iş yapamâ,yacak duruma girmiş ve ömrüriün .sonuna kadar bakıma ihtiyacı olacak olan davacıya. K.L.15,000.- tazminat verildi. Oliver and Others v. Ashman and Another (1961) 3 All E.R. 323 davasında 20 aylık olan davacı bir yol kazasında beyninden ağır yaralanarak akli muvazenesini kaybederek konuşamayacak ve herhangi bir şey anlamayacak duruma girdi. Tıbbi şahadete göre davacının ailesinden mada devamlı bir bakıcıya ihtiyacı olacaktı: Bû, durumda olân davaciya K.L.11,000.tazminat verildi. Daha örıce iktibas ettiğim Daish davâsında davacı kaza gününde S yaşından aşağı idi. Kazadan dolayı beyniriden ağır surette yaralandı ve yürüyemiyecek duruma geldi. Davacıniri durumu bir parablegia'nın durumundari çok daha kötü idi. Bidayet Mahkemesi davacıya verilecek olan tazminatı K.L.16,000.- olarak tespit etti. İstinaf Mahkemesi ise bu tazminatın az olduğu kanaatırıa vararak tazminatı K.L.26.000 yükseltti. İstinaf Mahkemesi tazminatı tespit ederken ydavacının müstakbel kazanç kaybının haftada K.L.2O.- olacağını nazarı itibara alarak müstakbel kazanç kaybı başlığı altında -davacının K:L.6000.- tazminat alması gerektiği kanaatına vardı. Geriye ' kalan başlıklar için de genel tazminatı K.L.20,000 olarak tesbit etti. Müstakbel kazânç kaybı için Stephenson L.f: sayfa 34'de şurıları söyledi:-
 

"It is impossible to say what the plaintiff would have done 'or earned if he had reached normal manhood. Assuming that he had become a labourer earning K.L.2O.- a week net at about 20 years of age - and that assumption may be too favaourable to the defendant - the multiplier to be applied to the resulting annual loss of about K.L.1,000.cannot be less than 12. ; The uncontradicted medical evidence is 2hat he is likely to live into his forties. Give him K.L.12;000 on tla.t. basis and halve it because the  sum he is awarded for loss earnings will double in the decade before he would have earned it, and you get what we think is a fair fiure of K.L:6,000.-'' · . ,
Mckennell v. White (1971) S.L.T. ·61 davasında 5 yaşında olan bir çocuk bir araba. kazası geçirdi ve .bu kazadâ 4 uzvu da paralize oldu. Mâhkeme · çoçuğa, müstakbel kazancıtidari ma.da, bütün kayıp ve zararı için K.L.14,400.- genel; tazminat tesbit etti.
Tabü hiç şüphe yoktiır ki bu tazminat miktarı daha ·evvel belirttiğim gibi her kazazadenin özel durtımuna bağlıdır. Kıbrısta davacının aldığı yaraların tıpa tıp ayni yaraları alan herhangi bir davaya rastlamış değilim. Ancak hemen hemen ayni ağır yaraları alan veya davacının yaralarına yakın yara alan Türk ve Rum Mahkemelerinde görülen birkaç dava mevcuttur. Kanaatımca bu davalardaki davacıların durumunu tetkik edip istinaf konusu olan davacının durumu ile kıyaslayarak istinaf konus davada makul tazminatın ne olabileceği hususunda mahkeme makul ve adil bir karara varabilir.
İlk önce Türk İstinaf Mahkemesinde karar bağlanan iki istinafı gözden geçirelim.
Safa Tahsin v. Selma Selim, Hukuk İstinaf No.ll/70 davasında 27 yaşında olan davacı 19 Mart 1966'da geçirdiği bir araba kazasında ağır yaralandı ve Bidayet Mahkemesi davacının alacağı tazmiriatı tam mes'u. liyet esası üzerinden K.L.74.00.- olarak. Iespit etti. Davali tespit olunan tazminatın aşikâr surette fahiş oldiğunu iddia ederek Yüksek Mahkemeye istinaf eyledi. Yüksek Mahkeme 23 Temmuz 1970!de 've`rdiği çoğunluk hükmü ile Bidayet Mahkemesinin tespit' ettiği genel taîminatın fahiş olmadığı kanaatına vardı. Azınlık hükmünü veren  ben ise tespit olunan K:L.7000.-1ık tâzminatın pek fazla  olduğunu ve K:L:5;500.-yaşmaması gerektiği kanaatını belirttim. Davacının yaraları ve kazadan sonraki durumu çoğunluk hükmünde sayfa 8'de şu şekilde belirtilmiştir:"Müddei hastahaneye 19 Mart 1966 tarihinde getirildiği zaman derin bir baygınlık içerisindeydi. Kafatasının arkasında büyük bir hematom vardı. Bacağının 3'üncü alt kısmının kırık olduğu müşahade edilmiştir. Alınan röntgen neticesi, müddeinin sağ ayağının 'tibia' ve· 'fibula' kısımlarının kırık olduğu kat'i surette teşhis edilmiştir. Müddeinin 21 Mart tarihinde nefesi aniden durduğu için sun'i teneffüs tatbik edilerek müddei ameliyat edilmiş, kafatası açılarak mezkûr hematom çıkarılmiştır. Müddei keridine geldiği zaman sol kolu ve sol bacağı paraliz_e olmuş bir vaziyetteydi. Bu dabeyne olan zarardan ileri gelmekteydi. Müddeinin çok ciddi durumu dolayısıyle bacağındaki kırığa ancak 15 Nisanda müdahale edilebilmiştir. Ameliyat neticesi kırık düzeltilmiş ve alçıya konmuştur, fakat aradan zaman geçtiği için kırık kavuşamamıştır. Aylarca devam eden fizioterapiden sonra müddei tedricen sol kol ve bacağını az birşey oynatabilmeğe muvaffak olmuştur. Müddei 94 gün hastahanede kaldıktan sonra 21 Haziran 1966 tarihinde taburcu edilmiştir.
Müdeiyi son olarak duruşma gününden bir gün ewel muayene eden Dr. Rose'a göre müddeinin son durumu şöyledir.
Müddei tamamıyle bir insan kalıntısından ibarettir. (human wreck). Bu da 4 sebebe dayanmaktadır.
(a) Müddei tamamen işleyemiyecek bir durumdadır, hatta kendi kerıdine lâyıkı veçhile bakacak bir durumda olduğu da şüphelidir.
(b) Müddei baş ağrılarından, baş dönmesinden ve konsantre etmek kuwetinden tamamıyle mahrumdur.
(c) Normal olarak yürüyecek bir durumda değildir. (d) Sağ bacağının kırık olduğu yerde halen sakatlik mevcuttur.

Yine Dr. Rose'a göre, kaza neticesi müddeinin karakteri değişmiştir ve cansız bir duruma gelmiştir. Müddei evlenmek şansını kaybetmiştir. Buna da sebep olarak Dr. Rose, müddeinin fakir olduğunu ve kendi kendine bakmaya muktedir olmadığını göstermektedir. (Müddei de şahadetinde, kazadan ewel evlenmek için kendisine iki talip çıktığı halde kazadan sonra kimsenin talip çıkmadığını söylemiştir.)
Müddeinin bugünkü durumunda ileride herhangi bir terakki olmayacaktır. Bilâkis durumunun daha da kötüye gitmesi ihtimali vardır. Sağ ayaktaki kırığın tamamıyle kavuşmamasından mütevellit durumun diğer komplikasyonlara yani trumatic asteoarthrities  sebep olacağı ihtimali vardır. Beyine olan zararın durumunda da ileride terakki kayciedileceği çok şüphelidir. Çünkü terakki olacak olursa iki senede bunun olması beklenmektedir. Halbuki kaza gününden son muayene gününe kadar aradan 4 seneye yakın bir müddet geçmiştir. Müddeinin kolunda da hiçbir terakki olmayacaktır.”

O davada davacının müstakbel kazanç kaybı K.L.150.- olarak tespit edilmişti Kanaatımca müstakbel kazancı K.L.150.- olarak tespit edildikten sonra müstakbel kazanç kaybı için davacının alabileceği genel tazminat K.L.2000.- civarında idi. Diğer başlıklar tahtinde (yani davacının çekmiş olduğu ve çekeceği sızı ve rahatsızlıklar, hayat nimetlerinden mahrum oluşu ve herhangi başka bir hususta) verilebilecek olan genel tazminat da K.L.5000.- civarında tesbit edilmiştir. O davada görüldüğü gibi davacının aldığı yaralar hemen hemen istinaf konusu olan davadaki davacının aldığı yaralar kadar ağırdır.
Ahmet Yusuf v. Ayhan Salâhi, Hukuk İstinaf No.l/73 davasında davacı 8 Nisan 1970 tarihinde Lefkoşada davalının methalder olduğu bir araba kazasında ağır yaralandı. Bidayet Mahkemesi davacının almaya hakkı olan tazminatı tam mes'uliyet esası üzerinden K.L.7000.- olarak tespit etti. Davalı tespit olunan genel tazminatın aşikâr surette fahiş olduğunu iddia ederek istinaf eyledi. Diğer taraftan davacı ise tesbit olunan tazminatın aşikâr surette az olduğunu ileri sürerek mukabil istinaf eyledi. Yüksek Mahkeme davacının aldığı yaralar ve kazanç kaybı hakkında hükmünde sayfa 1'de şunları söyledi:-
"Bidayet Mahkemesi huzurunda verilen şahadete göre kaza neticesinde davacının sağ bacağının orta, ön iç yan kısmında 4-S cm. uzunluğunda cilt ve adale kısımlarının parçalanmış olduğu ve yaralardan femur kemiğinin kırılmış olan üst kısmı dışarıya çıkmış, kazadan hemen sonra davacı ameliyata tabi tutulmuş, hastahanede 5-6 ay kadar kalmış, daha sonra özel bir klinikte 4 ay tedavi görmüş ve 4 ameliyat geçirmiş olduğu sabit olmuştur. Yine Bidayet Mahkemesinin bulgusuna göre kazadan mütevellit davacının sağ bacağında 5 1/2 cm. kısalık kalmış, sağ bacağın ön iç yan kısmında ortada 4x4 cm. ebadında adale defekt'i ile yapışım, ciltte 11 cm. uzunluğunda bir nedbe meydana gelmiştir. Sağ bacağın diz bölgesinin arkasında akıntıdan mütevellit 1 cm. büyüklüğünde fistül yeri, sağ bacak hareketinde %40 zafiyet mevcuttur. Sağ bacağı diz tarafa doğru açan adalelerde %30 zafiyet hasıl olmuştur. Sağ dizde hareket ancak 20 derecedir, ve bu devamlı kalacaktır, 80 derecelik hareketi yapamayacaktır. Bidayet Mahkemesinin bulgusuna göre davacının ayakta iş yapmasına hayatı boyunca imkân olmayacaktır, ancak oturarak iş yapabilecektir. Mahkeme huzurunda verilen şahadete göre davalının sağ bacağı belden aşağıya 10 ay kadar alçıda kaldı ve alçıdan çıkarıldıktan sonra bir sene kadar koltuk değnekleri ile yürüyebilmiş ve halen de baston yardımcılığı ile yürümektedir. Bidayet Mahkemesinin bulgusuna göre kazadan önce davacı bir inşaat boyacısı idi ve günde K.L.2.gündelik almakta idi. Bidayet Mahkemesi hafta sonları ve bazan çalışmadığı günlerin de vaki olması ihtimalini göz önünde tutarak davacının aylık kazancının K.L.4O.- olduğu kanaatına vardı."

Yüksek Mahkeme hükmüne devamla Bidayet Mahkemesinin tespit ettiği K.L.7000.-lık tazminatın çok fazla olduğu kanaatına vararak makul ve adil tazminatı K.L.5,500.- olarak tespit etti ve bu hususta hükmünde sayfa 4'de şunları söyledi:-

"Genel tazminat konusuna gelince Bidayet Mahkemesi daha önce belirttiğimiz gibi genel tazminatı K.L.7000.- ola- rak tespit etmiştir. Genel tazminat tespit edilirken bir


şahsın çekmiş olduğu ve çekeceği sızı, ızdırap ve rahatsızlıklara ilâveten, bazı hayat nimetlerinden mahrum oluşu ve yapılan bedenen zarar nazarı xtibara alınır. Buna ilâveten en mühim husus müstakbel kazanç kaybıdır. Bidayet Mahkemesi maalesef davacının mütakbel kazanç kaybının ne olabileceğini tespit etmiş değildir. Bu huşusta herhangi birşey söylemiş değildir. Davacının almış olduğu yaraları, doktorun verdiği şahadeti nazarı itibara alarak davacının müstakbel kazanç kaybının takriben kazadan önceki kazancının yarısı kadar yani ayda K.L.2O.- olabileceği kanaatına vardık.
Davacının kazadan aklığı yaraları, 4 ameliyat geçirdiğini, çekmiş, olduğu ve çekeceği sızı, ızdırap ve rahatsızlıkları, bazı hayat nimetlerinden mahrum olduğunu, 10 ay kadar hastahane ve klinikte kaldığını, duruşma gününde baston ile yürüyebildiğini, senede asgari olarak K.L.240.- kazanç kaybedeceğini, bazı davalarda verilen tazminat miktarını, Kıbrısta hüküm sürmekte olan sosyal, ekonomik ve endüstriyel şartların İngilterede hüküm sürmekte olan sosyal, ekonomik ve endüstriyel şartlardan farklı olduğunu nazarı itibara alarak Bidayet Mahkemesinin genel tazminat olarak tespit ettiği K.L.7000.-nın çok fazla olduğu kanaatındayız. Bu gibi davalarda tespit olunacak ,olan tazminatın mükemmel tazminat değil, makul ve adil tazminat olması gerekir: Kanaatımızca yukarıda belirttiğimiz bütün hususlar tüm olarak göz önünde tutulduğunda K.L.5,500.-lık bir miktar makul ve adil bir tazminattır. İşbu tazminat miktarını tespit ederken tespit olunan tazminatın her iki taraf için makul ve adil bir tazminat olması gerektiğini nazarı itibara aldık."

	O davada davacının 23 yaşlarında olduğunu ve müstakbel kazanç kaybının Yüksek Mahkeme tarafından senevi K.L.240.- olarak tespit edildiğini göz önünde tutarak müstakbel kazanç kaybı için verilebilecek olan tazminat miktarının en azdan K.L.3000.- civarında olması gerektiği aşikârdır. Yüksek Mahkemenin ıüm olarak tespit ettiği K.L.5,500.- genel tazminattan müstakbel kazanç kaybı için alması gereken tazminat çıkarıldığında müstakbel kazanç kaybından mada diğer hususlar için alabileceği genel tazminatın K.L.2,500.- civarında tespit edildiği görülmektedir. Hiç şüphe yoktur ki o davadaki davacının aldığı yaralar istinaf konusu olan davadaki davacının aldığı yaraların tıpa tıp aynisi olmamakla beraağırdırkümde belirtildiği gibi o davadaki davacının yaraları da oldukça ağırdır.

Şimdi de Rum Mahkemelerinde son zamantarda karara bağlanan iki davayı gözden geçirelim.
25 Eylül 1968'de Emir Ahmet Cemal v. Zim Israel Navi ation Co. Ltd. (1968) 9 J.S.C. 1000 davasında Rum Yüksek Mahkemesinin verdiği hüküm ile Bidayet Mahkemesinin tespit ettiği K.L.4150.- genel tazminatı İstinaf Mahkemesi K.L.6000.-ya yükseltmiştir. O davadaki kazaya uğrayanın yaraları ile ilgili sayfa 1002'de şunlar yer almaktadır:
 

"As regards the plaintiff's injuries, the trial Judge found, mainly from the medical evidence before him,` that the plaintiff, a. married man of 41  years of age, with a wife and three children to support sustained: ' 1. Shock; 2. Concussion; 3. Fractures of the pelvis; 4. Injury to the urethra. He was hospitalized for approximately four months and underwent several operations for the management of the traumatized urethra and its complications. After discharge from the clinic he stayed in bed under treatment for another three months.' The Judge also found that the plaintiff 'will never be able to resume his employement as a stevedore; he will never be able to do anything else but very light sitting down job, if he is lucky to find a sympathetic employer. And that as a result of his injuries the ıılaintiff now has a permanent incapacity of %65; and he will continue having pain in view of his injuries to the urethra , and that he has become permanently impotent.' It; may be added here that the percentage of incapacity was agreed between counsel during the trial."

 Tazminat hususunda Bidayet Mahkemesinin bulgusu ile ilgili sayfa 1002 de şunlar yer almaktadır:-

"On the basis of those findings the trial Judge proceeded to assess the damages. For loss of wages from the_ date of the accident, January 12, 1964, to the trial in  April, 1967, a period of about three years and three months, the Judge found and awarded the sum of K.L.1,521.-"

ve sayfa 1003'de şunlar yer almaktadir:
"As to general damages, after directing his mind to the matters which have to be taken into consideration under this head, the judge came to the conclusion that 'the right figure to award in relation to a continuous loss of earnings, for past and future pain and suffering, and also the 'inconvenience' resulting from impotency, would be the amount of K.L.4,150.,"

Bidayet Mahkemesi tarafından tespit edilen K.L.4,150.- genel tazminatın düşük olduğu hususunda Yüksek Mahkeme sayfa 1008'de şunları söyledi:-

"So from October 1967, when the appellant was 44 years of age, until the age of 60 which the Judge took into account in finding the general damages, there is a period of about 16 years; to which one may add another five to reach the age provided under the social insurance laws.
For such a period the appellant was totally incapacitated as a stevedore; and was incapacitated to a degree of %65 for any other kind of work. At the time of the accident he was earning K.L.39.- a month. To cover this loss alone, a very large part of the amount awarded as general damages, would be needed.
What would be left to cover past and future pain and suffering for such a long treatment, with several operations and from the physical injuries, including the irreparable damage to the urethra; and also to cover the inconvenience and other serious consequences of sexual impotency for a man of appellant's age and health, would, in our view, be only a very small sum, constituting a completely erroneous estimate of appellant's loss in these respects. We therefore, find it necessary to re-assess the general damages. And without going outside the matters considered in this connection, by the trial Judge; but looking at them in the IighI of the medical evidence on record (particularly exhibit 1) we reach the conclusion that the appellant is entitled to K.L.6,000.- under the head of general damages."

 Rum mahkemesindeki işbu istinaftan görülüyor ki davacı 4 ay gibi uzun bir müddet hastahanede kalmış ve birçok ağır ameliyatlar geçirmiştir. O davadaki davacının kazancı ayda K.L.39.- idi, ve işbu kazancının asgari olarak 2/3'ünü kaybetmişti. O davada yalnız müstakbel kazanç kaybı için davacınn K.L.3,C00-3,500.- civarında bir tazminat alması gerekirdi. Bütün başlıklar için Rum Yüksek Mahkemesi K.L.6,000.genel tazminat tesbit ettiğine göre müstakbel kazanç kaybından mada bütün hususlar için tespit edilen tazminat K.L.2,500.- K.L.3,000.- civarındadır. O davadaki davacının aldığı yaralar hemen hemen istinaf konusu davadaki davacının aldığı yaralar kadar ağırdır.
Costakis Andreou v. Costakis Karkallis and Others ( 1971 ) 1 J.S.C. 135 davasında 28 yaşında olan davacı 4 Şubat 1968'de Limasol-Baf yolunda bir minibüs sürerken karşıdan gelen bir taksi ile çarpışmış ve kaza neticesinde davacı ağır surette yaralanmış, taksi söförü ise ölmüştür. Davacı ilk önce 12 Mart 1968'e kadar Limasol Genel Hastahanesinde ve ondan sonra Kasım 1968 ayının ortalarına kadar Lefkoşa Hastahanesinde kaldı. Davacının hayatını kurtarmak için sağ bacağı ampute edildi. Kazadan sonra davacının sağ kolu ve eli işe yaramaz hale geldi. En basit hayat ihtiyaçları için dahi başkasının yardımına muhtaçtır. Kaza zamanında davacı sıhhatli ve neş'eli bir genç adamdı ve ayda K.L.6O.- kazancı vardı. Bidayet Mahkemesi davacının istikbalde herhangi bir iş yapamayacağı, hayatının sonuna kadar bir bakıcıya ihtiyacı olduğunu ve tüm hayat nimetlerinden mahrum olduğunu nazarı itibara alarak genel tazminat olarak K.L.10,000 tesbit etti. Davacı tesbit edilen genel tazminatın çok az olduğunu ileri sürerek Rum İstinaf Mahkemesine istinaf eyledi. İstinaf 3 Aralık 1970'de karara bağlandı ve davacının ömrünün sonuna kadar en basit hayat ihtiyaçlarını karşılaması için başkalarının yardımına muhtaç olduğunu ve kaybettiği müstakbel kazancı göz önünde tutarak Bidayet Mahkemesinin tespit ettiği K.L.10,000.- genel tazminatın çok az olduğu kanaatına vararak tazminat Rum Yüksek Mahkemesi tarafından K.L.14,000.-ya yükseltilmiştir.
Davacının yaraları ve kazancı hakkında sayfa 136'da şunlar yer almaktadır:-
"According to the evidence of an orthopaedic surgeon who examined the appellant on IVovember 19, 1968, soon after his discharge f rom hospital, when his condition had practically 'crystallized' - as the trial Court put it- and who also examined the appellant before giving evidence at the trial about a year later, in December 1969, the appellant shall be helpless invalid for the rest of his life. Hes right leg was amputated in a 'life-saving operation' -as the doctor described it- leaving only a short stump high up the thigh; his right arm and hand are practically useless; and he needs helpj even for the ordinary necessities of life. He may benefir from rehabilitation treatment in a rehatıilitation centre abroad, as none is, so far, available in the Island.
At the time of the accident, the appellant was a healthy and joviai young man, earning a salary of K.L.4O.- per month plus a commission on his sales averaging another K.L.2O.- per month."

Genel tazminat hususunda ise sayfa 138-139'da şunlar yer almaktadır:-
"We now come to the general damages. It was urged on behalf of the plaintiff that owing to the condition in which the plaintiff is now found due to his injuries, the cost of taking a course in a rehabilitation home abroad, as described by the evidence, must be taken into consideration, in the circumstances. Several hundred pounds may have to be spent for this purpose. Rehabilitation treatment will not only help the plaintiff physically by teaching him to make better use of what is left of his body, but it will also help him psychologically be keeping his hopes alive; or reviving them. As rightly observed by Mr. Cacoyiannis, counsel for the respondents, a person of the plaintiff's age should not feel like 'closing his books' with life. There are forces in human being -learned counsel reminded us- which nature will help him to develop in order to improve his condition. The cost of a rehabilitation tratment abroad will have to come out of the general damages.

There is another factor which must be taken into account in this case. For considerable time, if not for the rest of his life - which for this young invalid may well mean a rather long period- the plaintiff will need help in order to meet the necessities of life. He needs help to dress and undress; to wash himself, to go to the lavatory etc. Taking these facts into consideration together with all other matters bearing on the question of general damages, we now have to decide whether the appellant has been able to show sufficient reason for intervention by this Court, in the amount awarded by the trial Court."
 

Rum Yüksek Mahkemesi davacının durumunu bir fiziki kalıntı (physical wreck) olarak nitelendirmiştir. Rum Yüksek Mahkemesi davadaki davacının alması gereken K.L.14,000.-lık tazminatı tespit ederken, müstakbel kazanç kaybı başlığı altında ne kadar alabileceği hususunu hükümde belirtmedi. Mahkeme tazminatı yekün bir miktar olarak tespit etmiştir. Mamafih, sıhhatli, neş'eli olan ve kazadan hemen önce senede K.L.720.- kazancı olan bir şahsın yaIiız müstakbel kazanç kaybı için alması gereken miktarın en az K.L.8,000 - K.L.8,500.- arası olması gerekirdi kanaatındayım. O davadaki davacının aldığı yaralar ve yaralardan sonraki durumu hemen hemen istinaf konusu davadaki çocuğun aldığı yaralar kadar ağırdır- e fiziki durumları hemen hemen aynidir. O davada da davacının en basit hayat ihtiyaçlarını karşılaması için devamlı bir bakıcıya ihtiyacı vardı. O davadaki davacı 8-9 ay kadar uzun bir müddet için hastahanede kalmış ve bu esnada hayatının kurtulması için sağ bacağı ampute edilmiştir. O davada davacının bir rehabilitasyon kursu alması ve bu kurs için birkaç yüz lira sarfolunması gerektiği kanaatına varıldı. O davada görülüyor ki müstakbel kazanç kaybından mada olan hususlar için davacıya verilen tazminat miktarı en fazla K.L. 5,500 - K.L.6,000 arasıdır.

İstinaf esnasında davacının avukatı tespit olunan tazminat miktarının ileride meydana gelecek enflasyon neticesi olarak paranın kıymetinden düşebileceğinin de göz önünde tutulması gerektiğini ileri sürmüştür. Kanaatımca tazminat davalarında tazminatın tesbit edildiği güne kadar para düşüşü nazarı itibara alınabilir ancak tazminatın tespit edildiği günden sonra paranın kıymetinden kaybedeceği ihtimali nazarı itibara alınamaz. Bunun da sebebi istikbalde paranın kıymetinden düşme ihtimali olduğu gibi paranın kıymetinin yükselme ihtimali de mevcut olduğudur. Paranın kıymetinden kaybetme ihtimali daha fazla ise de eldeki para sağlam bir yatırımla kıymetini muhafaza edebilir. Enflasyon hususunda Widgery L.J., Mitchell (b his next friend Haze Doreen Mitchell) v. Mulholland and Another No.2 1971 2 All E.R. 1205 davasında sayfa 1217'de şunları söyledi:-

"Inflation which has reduced the value of money at the date of the award must, thus, be taken into account, but an award which is proper according to the value of the pound at the date when it is made is not to be increased merely because each K.L.l.- awarded may have decreased in real value in five or ten years' time. Once the award is made, the plaintiff must protect himself against a subsequent fall in the value of money by prudent investment, as must a legatee under a will or the winner of a footfall pool. This principle applies equally to an award of damages for loss of ability to earn as it does to an award for loss of amenity and pain and suffering. Each is a capital sum to compensate for present loss."

Tazminat davalarında diğer bir mühim husus da ağır yaralanan kazazadenin ömrünün ne kadar sürebileceği hususudur. Bu husus hiç şüphe yoktur ki tıbbi şahadet ile bir dereceye kadar tespit edilebilir ancak bir şahsın ömrü beklenmeyen bir hastalık veya beklenmyen herhangi bir kaza veya tehlike dolayısıyle kısalabilir veya derhal sona erebilir. Bundan dolayı bu gibi davalarda bu hususların da daima göz önünde tutulması gerekir. Beklenmeyen hastalık veya tehlike genellikle çocuklarda daha fazla beklenebilir. Bunun içindir ki 18 yaşından yukarı olan bir şahıs hayatını bir kazada kaybettiğinde o şahsın terekesine a şahsın hayat intizarını kaybetmesinden dolayı verilen tazminat miktarı K.L.500.civarında olduğu halde küçük bir çocuk bir kazada hayatını keybettiğinde küçük çocuğun terekesine, küçük çocuğun hayat intizarını kaybetmesinden dolayı verilen tazminat miktarı K.L.200-300.- civarındadır. Dolayısıyle herhangi bir meselede verilen tıbbi şahadette bir şahsın ömrünün muaysn bir müddet olacağı ihtimali belirtilse dahi, ömrünün daha kısa olabileceği şansı da daima göz önünde tutulması gerekir. Bu hususta  Mitchell davasında Sir Gordon Willmer satfa 1219 ve1220'de şunları söyledi:

"This follaws from the fact that they are, and must be , based on the performance of the average man. The average man has an expectation of life of a certain number of years. This is a matter of probability, but for purpöses of actuarial calculation it has to be treated as a certainty. Yet nobody can say whether an individual plaintiff is an average man, or that he wili live for the expectation of life of an average man of his age. Any actuarial calculation must, therefore, be discounted to allow for the chance that he may only live for a shorter period. The chances, and not the probabilities, are what the judge has to evaluate in any given case. It is true that there is also a chance that the individual plaintiff may live longer than average expectation of life. The chances are equal either way, but as a matter of calculation it can be shown that the impact of the chance of shorter life is of greater significance than that of longerr life."

Bu davadaki davacı çocuğun ömrünt'ırı ne olabileceği hususunda kat'i tıbbi şahadet olmamakla beraber Dr. Akan Sonuç'a parablegia'nın o cuğun ömrüne tesir edip etmiyeceği hususunda bir soru sorulduğunda Dr. Akan Sonuç parablegia'nın çocuğun ömrü bakımından tesir etmediğini fakat komplikasyon doğurabileceğini, idrarını tutamadığından sondaj komak gerekebileceğini, bunun için iltihap mevzuu bahis olabileceğini ve belki de çocuğun bir injeksiyon hastası olabileceğini söyledi. Bu ahadet ışığında bütün ihtimalleri göz önünde tutarak çocuğun 40-50 yaşına kadar yaşama ihtimali olduğu addolunabilir. Bu durumda çocuğun müstakbel kazanç kaybının ne olabileceğini tespit etmek gerekir. Daha ewel de belirttiğim gibi müstakbel kazanç bazı hallerde ve bilhassa kazazadenin çocuk olduğu hallerde kat'i olarak tesbit edilemez ve ailesinin mali sosyal durumu ve çocuğun istikbali hakkında niyetlerinin ne olduğu göz önünde tutularak spekülatif olarak bir miktar tespit edilir. Bu hususlarda mahkeme huzurunda olan şahadeti nazarı itibara alarak çocuğun müstakbel kazancını senevi K.L.500-600. arası olarak tespit etmek ug.un ve makuldur kanaatındayım. Ancak çocuğun yaraları belden aşağı
olduğu ve belden yukarı kısmında yani çocuğun kollarında, ellerinde ve kafasında herhangi bir yara olmadığı ve bunlarla iş yapabileceği hususunun S. and Another davasında Hinckliffe"in dediği gibi nazarı itibara alınması gerekir. Kanaatımca bu hususlar nazarı itibara alındığında davacı çocuğun müstakbel kazanç kaybını senevi K.L.400.- civarında tespit etmek uygun ve adildir. Senevi K.L.400.- müstakbel kazanç kaybı olan bir şahsın alacağı makul tazminat K.L.5,000.- civarındadır. Bu meselede tazminatı alacak olan davacının küçük olduğu ve ancak 16 veya 18 yaşına bastığında kazanç sağlayabileceği göz önünde tutulduğunda ve davacının müstakbel kazanç kaybı için alacağı tazminatı şimdiden peşin olarak alaeağı ve bu alacağı peşin paranın kazancını sağlayabilecek yaşa gelinceye kadar 2-2 1/2 misli olacağı nazarı itibara alındığında, makul görülen K.L.5000.- tazminatı davacı küçük çocuk olduğu için Daish davasında olduğu gibi yarıya indirmek gerekir. Dolayısıyle davacının müstakbel kazanç kaybı için alması gereken makul tazminatın azami olarak K.L. 2,500.- civarında olduğu kanaatındayım. Bu nedenle Bidayet Mahkemesinin müstakbel kaıanç kaybı için tespit ettiği K.L.5,000.- tazminat miktarı hatalıdır ve bunun K.L.2,500.-ya indirilmesi gerekir.
Şimdi de müstakbel kazanç kaybından mada diğer hususlar için verilebilecek tazminatı eleştirmek gerekir. Bidayet Mahkemesi davacının hayat nimetlerinden mahrum olacağını, gayri tabü bir hayat süreceğini, başkasının bakımına muhtaç olacağını, maddi ve manevi kendisini kollayacak birisi olmadıkça hayat idamesine imkân olmadığını, soyunması, giyinmesi, yıkanması, tuvalete gitmesi gibi en basit ve daimi yapması gereken şeylerde dahi bir kimsenin yarımına ihtiyaç olacağını göz önünde tuarak müstakbel kazanç kaybından mada diğer hususlar için genel tazminatı K.L.10,000.- tespit etmiştir. Kanaatımca Bidayet Mahkemesinin nazarı itibara aldığı bütün hususlar ve bakım için davacının halen herhangi bir masraf ödemediği ancak her an ödeyebileceği ihtimali ve Kıbrısta Türk ve Rum Mahkemelerinde daha ewel iktibas ettiğim davalardaki tespit olunan tazminat miktarları göz önünde tutulduğunda istinaf konusu davada davacı çocuğa müstakbel kazanç kaybından madaki hususlar için, verilebilecek o'an azami makul ve adil genel tazminatın K.L.7,000-7,500. olması gerekir. Müstakbel kazanç kaybı da dahil, genel tazminat olarak davacıya yekün olarak verilecek olan azami makul ve adil tazminat K.L.10,000.-dir. Unutmamak gerekir ki davacı bu büyük miktar ile sağlam bir yatırım yapabilir ve sağlam bir yatırım ile derhal senevi en azdan K.L.600.- civarında bir kazanç sağlayabilir. Hiç şüphe yoktur ki davacı çok küçük olduğu için davacının şimdiki ihtiyaçları K.L.600.-dan çok daha aşağı bir miktar ile karşılanır ve dolayısıyle bu şağlayacağı kazanç da verilen yekün tazminat miktarına eklendiğinde davacı büyüdüğünde şimdi alacağı yekün tazminat miktarı çok daha fazla çoğalmış olacaktır.

Netice itibarıyle yeicün K.L.10,000.-lık tazminat ile Lord Denning'in Fletcher davasında dediği gibi, davacı ihtiyacı olan, makuliyet çerçevesinde para ile satın alabileceği, herşeyi satın alabilecek duruma girmiş olur
Yukarıda belirttiklerimin ışığında istinafın kabul edilmesi taraftarıyım
Ahmet İzzet: Sayın Başkanın verdiği hükümle hemfikirim. İstinafın reddolunması taraftarıyım.
M. Necati Münir, Başkan: Netice olarak, oy çoğunluğu ile işbu istinaf reddolunur ve istinaf masraflarının istinaf eden (davalı) tarafından ödenmesi emrolunur.
                                                                                                                                 Yüksek Mahkeme
28 Nisan 1973.