BEFORE  THE AUTHORITIES CONCERNED
BEFORE THE NICOSIA COMMISSION OF ENQUIRY

Between :
1 . Ahmet Rasım Kasap of Nicosia
2.  Rasım Adil of Nicosia
                      and
Nicosia  Turkish Police

                                      				  (Appeal No. 4/65, Case No. 585/65)



           Kalitesiz yiyecek vc ilâçların satımının yasaklanması - Fasıl 261 Yiyecek ve İIâçIarın Satımı Yasasının 4(1) ve (2). paragrafları.

           Tarım ürünlerinin karıştırılması – Fasıl 24 Tarım ürünlerinin karıştırılması Yasasının 3(1)(b) paragrafı.
      
           Satım.   Satımın tanımı – Fasıl 267 Eşya Satım Yasasının 4. maddesine göre satımın tanımı.  Fasıl 1 Yorum Yasasının 2. maddesine göre satımın tanımı - Sanıkların içerisinde sağlığa zararlı boya maddesi bulunan 20 varil yağı satmakla itham edilmesi - Sanıkların  satım fiilinin       tamamlanmadığını sadece satım için bir sözleşme yapıldığını iddia etmelri -
Satımın tanımının Fasıl 267'nin 4. maddesine göre yapılması.
            
              Teşebbüs – Fasıl 155 Ceza Usül Yasasının 85(2). paragrafına göre  bir suçu işlemekle itham olunan sanığın İthamname değiştirilmeden suça teşebbüsten mahkûm edilmesi.
             
              Kimyager - Fasıl 24 Tarım, ürünlerinin  Karıştırılması   Yasasının  2(1) paragrafına göre tanıklık yapacak Kimyagerin bu yasa maksatları için  Kimyager olarak tayin edilmesi ve bunun Resmî Gazete'de ilân edilmesi gereği. - Bu işlem yapılmadığına göre  Kimyagerin şahadetinin  Fasıl 24 maksatları açısından geçersiz olması.
         
              Müsadere - Kimyager 10 varil yağa karıştırılmış olan boyanın sağlığa  zararlı olup olmadığını kesinlikle tesbit edilemiyeceğini söylemesi.  Bu  ifade ışığında 10 varil yağın müsaderesi hatalı olması.



JUDGMENT

                The two Appellants, who are  merchants of Nicosia, were charged before the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry on five different counts. Count 1  was based on section 4(1) and (2) of the Sale of Food and Drugs Law, Cap. 261, Counts 2,3 and 4 were based on section 3(1) (b) of the Adulteration  of Agricultural groduce Law Cap. 24 and Count 5, in respect of which the       Appellants were not called upon to make their defence at their trial, related  to an alleged offence contrary to sections 298, 367 and 35 of the Criminal  Code Cap. 154.
 
                 Both  the Appellants were convicted on 7/ l2/1965 on Count .I and were each sentenced to a fine of  £30, or to imprisonment for 4 months in   default and the following order was made under section 16 of Cap. 261 in  respect of tlıe oil barrels which were the subject matter of the proceedings:-
         
                    "As to the barrels of boil belonging to the accused and which are in custody of the Police, the powers given to me under sertion 16 of Cap. 261, if the Authorities concerned can without delay find any means of separating or extracting the colouring from the oil so as not to make  it injurious to healt as well as to be able to ascertain the type of the oil which may have been sold or  used in other matters and if this seems impracticable and impossible then I older that all  the oil contained in those 20 barrels belonging  to the accused to be cenfiscated."
          
                   The Appellants have appealed against both their conviction and sentenee and the prosecution have made a cross-appeal against the acquittal of Appellants under counts. 2,3 and 4.
          
                  The facts of this case are fully set out in the judgement of the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry 'and need not be repated here.
         
                   Dealing first with the Appellants appeal against their convietion on  count 1, the grounds of appeal as set out in the written grounds of appeal as sot out in  the written grounds of appeal submitted on their behalf by  their counsel, and as arbued before this Committee, may be classified under  the following three heads :-
(1)	Ground No. 1: Whether or not a "sale" has taken place, within  the meaning of
       the term as used in sec. 4(1) of Cap. 261.
(2)	Ground No.2 : Whether or not there has been any "prejudice" to  the
       purchaserı within the meaning of section 4(1) of Cap. 261.
(3)	Ground No. 3 : The question of th.e admission of evidenee that  the matter 
       which had been added to the oil in question was injurious ta health.
         
With regard to Ground No.1, we are of the opinion on the undisputed  facts before us that the nature of the transaction between the Appellants and  the Turkish Communal Chamber, in. respect of the 10 barrels of oil which   are the subject matter of Count 1, was not a "sale" as defined in section 4  of the Sale of Goods Law, Cap. 267, but was only "an agreement to sell".  lt is relevant to quote in this connection the pravisions of sub-section (4)  or section 4 of Cap. 267, which reeds as follows :-
          
                  "(4) An agreement to sell becomes a sale when the time elapses or the  condifions are fulfilled subject to which the property in the goods is to be  transferred."
          
                    The conditions, subject to which the Turkish  Communal  Chamber,(the would-be purchaser) had accepted the offer of the Appellants,  (the would-be seilers) to sell their oil in question, namely, subject to the results of the analysis being satisfactary, had not been fulfillod.
          
                     It has been well' established in England that under statutory provisions  corresponding to section 4(1) of Cap. 261 that "there is no sale unless the  property in the goods passes from  soller to buyer" (see note (m) on page  483 of Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Edition, Vol. 17 and Watson V.  Coupland, (1945) 1 All E.R. 217)
                 
                     It has been submitted on behalf of the prosecution tha.t the definition of "sale" and "sell" in section 2 of the Interpretation Law  Cap. 1 applies also to seetion 4(1) of Cap. applies also to section 4(I) of Cap. 261. We have   carefully considered this argument but have come to the  conclusion  that   , because in other sections of Cag. 261 express referenee is made to exposing  for sale" or "offering for sale" (e.g. sections 8 and 9 of Cap. 261),  if the Legislature had intended the word "sell" in section 4(1) of Cag.261 also to  include "expose for sale" or "offer for saIe" then it would have done  so   expressly in section 4(1) also, From the fact that section 4(1), ln contra-dis- tinction to the other sections of Cap. 261, is limited to "sell" then it must be  supposed that the context of sec. 4(1) of Cag. 261 is such that the definition  of "sale" and "sell" in section 2 of Cap. 1 was not intended to apply. It is  hardly  necessary to draw attention to the opening words of sec. 2 of Cap. l,  to the effect that the  definitions in that section do not apply  if  "there is  something in the subject or context inconsistent with such construction."

                      Having reached  the conclusion, for the reasons above explained, that a "sale" has not taken place in this case under section 4(1) of Cap.261 of the 10 barrels  of oil which are the subject of Count 1, we are, however, of the opinion that the  Appelants attempted to sell the oil in question contrary to the provisions af section 4.(I) and (2) of Cap. 261.

                       We are therefore of the opinion, on the facts before us and as found   by the commission of Inquiry, that the Appelllants, although they have not committed the substantive offence with which they were charged on count  I under section 4(I) and (2) of Cap. 261 have, nevertheless, committed the  offence of attempting to commit the offence  with which  they  were  so charged.

                        W e have fully considered the additional written submissions made by counsel for the appellants dated 25th Dec. I965 on this point in coming to  the conclusion that the evidence before the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry can support a convictior of an attempt to commit the offence with which   the Appellants were charged on Count I. We would only refer, however, to  one of the submissions made by counsel  for Appellants  in his  additionat  written submissions of  25.12.1965 namely that as "sell" in section 4(1) of   Cap. 261 does not include offer to sell" or "expose for sale" then there can-not be an attempt to "sell" under section 4(1) of Cap. 261. We consider that  there is no substance in this argument because one can easily envisage a situation amounting to an attempt to sell (as in this case) without there necessarily being an offer or exposure for sale.

                         As regards Ground No. 2 of the  Appellants' grounds of appeal, it is  again well established on the authorities that "prejudice" is not confined to  pecuniary prejudice and that there is prejudice when ever  there is a sale of   an article in such a state that an ordinary unskilled  person  would  have  been prejudiced if he had received it in response to his demand for an artıckle of that deseription, although for some reason, peculiar to himself, the actual purchaser is not prejudıced (see Pearks, Gunston, etc. V. Ward, etc.  (%902) K.B.  1 and Halsbury's I.aws of England 3rd ed. Vol. 17, page  486, para. 902)

                          With regard to Ground No. 3 having regard to the evidence of prosecution witness No. 6,  Mrs.Ayshe Coshar, that it was not possible to ascertain, owing to the lack of  necessary aquipment what was the precise nature of the colouring matter found in the oil in question and that it was possible to have colouring matter which is not injurious to health (see pages 13 and I4 of the notes) we consider that very  little weight, or no weight  at  all,  should be given to the evidenee of this witness that such colouring matter is  injurious to health. It seems clear that the Commission of Inquiry wanted to  know whether or not the colouring matter in question was injurious to health     not because such fact is an element of the offence  with which the Appellants were charged on Count l, but because the Commission of Inquiry probably  thought it relevant to the question of sentence. 
we do not agree with counsel for Appellants that  the admission of such evidence was "highly prejusel     for  Appellants in so far as the question of their conviction  on Count 1 was concerned.

                         As stated above we consider that the evidence before tbe Commission  of Inquiry would support a conviction of both Appellants for the offence  of attempting to commit the offence with which they were charged on Count  1 and we must now consider whether, in exercise of the powers contained in section 145 {1) (c) of Cap 155 (which enables the setting aside of the conviction and convicting an Appellant "of any offence of which he might have  been convicted by the trial Court") a conviction for the offence af attempting  to commit the offence charged in Count 1 should  be substituted.  It    should be noted in this connection that subsection (2) of section 85 of the
Criminal Procedure Law Cap. 155 provides as follows :-  
         
                         "(2) If a person is charged with an offence, he may,  without altering the charge  or inforıaıation, be convicted of attempting to commit  the offence."

                     This being so, actinon under section 145 (1) (c) of Cap.  155 we  set aside the conviction of both AppeIlants for for the offence charged in Count and we substitude a conviction in respect of offence charged in Count 1, the particulars of which are set out in the said count, contrary to section  4(1) and (2) of the Sale of Food and Drugs Law, Cap. 261  and  sections  366 and 367 and 35 of the Criminal Code, Cap. 154 read  in conjuction  with the dafinition of "offence" in section 4 of Cap. 154.

                     It now remains to consider what sentence should be imposed  on the appellants under section 145 ( 1 ) {e) of Cap. 15 5 in respect of the new conviction which has now been substituted for the former conviction on Count I. In considerin this questin we have taken full account of very thing which    has been written and said on behalf of the Appellants by their counsel in that gart of the grounds of appeal against sentence and also  all that  has  been submitted iıa writing and orally at the hearing of this appeal  by  the counsel for the prosecution.

                     It is clear from the order of cinfiscation made by the Commission  of  Inquiry and which is set out in full at the beginning of this judgement that in object of this conditional confiscation of the barrels of oil in question  was meant, and quite rightly so in our opinion, not so much as a punishment  but in order to prevant a substance which might  be injurious  to  health
from being consumed by human beings.  It was no doubt  for this reason   that the confiscation was not made uneonditional but was only made subject  to the condition that if the authorities concerned were unable without delay  to "find any means or separating or extracting the colouring from the oil
so as not to make  it in injurious to health as well as to bo able to ascertain  the type of  the oi1 which may have been sold or used in other matters."

        In view of tho fact that prosocution witness No. 6 Mrs. Ayshe Coshar, was not able to state positively whaz was the precise typre of the colouring matter owing to the lack of necessary equipment (see page 13 of the notes) and in view of her evedence that it is possible to have some colouring matter which is not injurious to health (see page I4. of the notes) we consider that we should not make any new order of confiscation under section 16 (b) of Cap. 26I in the place of the confiscation order (which is automatically set aside along with the conviction in respect of which such confiscation order was made).

        It should also be pointed out in this connection  that  the  Supreme Constitutional Cour in several cases (e.g. District Officer, Nicosia V.Hji. Yannis 1 R.S.C.C. page 79, Gendarmerie V. A. Yiallouras, 2 R.S.C.C page28, etc.) has held that an order of forfeiture or an order to demolish a building etc. amount to a "punishment" within the meaning of that term; in paragraph 3 of Article 12 of  the Constitution, which provides that :-

        "No law shall provide for a punishmant which is disproportionate to the gravity of the offence."   

        For this reason also, in addition to ihe reasons stated earlier regarding the nature of  the evidence as to weather the coloıaring matter in question is positively injuries to health or not, we eoıısider that to mako the same confiseation order as that made by the Commisseon of Inquiry, would, having regard to the nature of the offence and all the relevant cireumstances  relating there to, be dispropoationate to the gravity of the offence in respect of which a conviction for attempt has been substituted in the place of the original  conviction on Count l.
       
               It should finally be observed in this connection that we presume that the reference to "20 barrels" in the confiseation order of the Commission of Inquiry m,ust have been an oversight and that it was intended that the confiscation order should only have applied to the 10 barrels referred  to  in  Count 1 , on which alone the Appellants were convieted and not also to the 10 additional barrels which the Appellants were anquitted.

      
                We do not therefore propose to make any order of confiscation under section 16 (b) of Cap. 261  in respect of the 10 barrels referred to in Count  l. It will  be up to the Police to take steps to ensure that the Appellants do  not use this oil in contravension of any Iaw in the same way as they would  have to do in respect of the 10 barrels which are the subject of count 4 on which the Appellants were acquitted.

              Coming now to the actual substantive sentence which should be imposed on the Appellants in respect of the substitued conviction, we are of  the opinion that, as we have decided not to make any order of confiscattion  under section 16 (b) of Cap. 261 we should impose a fine of £.50.- on each  of the Appellants (in the  place of the  30 fine which  was  imposed  on them by the Commission of Inquiry) and the two Appellants are accordingly each sentenced to pay a fine of £ 50.- or to imprisonment for 4 months in default in respect  of the conviction which has been substituted.
             
               Coming now to the cross-appeal of the prosecution against the acquittal  of the Appellants on counts 2, 3 and 4, we have given very careful consideration to the able arguments which have been put forward by counsel for the prosecution, and the replies thereto by counsel for the Appellants, and  we have come to the conclusion, after considering the various authorities  cited to us, that the Commission of Inquiry was correct in ruling that Mrs. Ayshe Coshar was not competent to give evidence of analysis is support of charges under the Adulteration of Agricultural Produce Law  Cap. 24 because she was not an "Analyst" as defined in secfion 2(1) of that Law as no   publication had been  made  in the Gazette authorizing her "to carry out tests for the purposes of this Law." Had the expression "Analyst" only been  defined for the purposes of section 11 and 12 of Cap. 24, which concern  the form of certification of analysis and the admission of such certificate as   prima facie evidence, then it might have been said that the matter was a  more formality and a matter of procedure and evidence and not of substance. But unfortunately howevex we cannot close our eyes to the fact that section 6(2) af Cap 24 expressly states that any sample taken under that  Iaw must be submitted to the "Analyst" (i.e. as defined in section 2 of Cap.24) and not to anybody else. The procedure laid down in section 5(2) of  Cap. 24 is also repeated in the proviso to the material section 8 of Cap. 24,  which again states that the officer taking a sample  “shall proceed in aceor-   dance with the procedure with regard to submission for analysis in subsection (2) of section 6)" Unfortunately this is a loop-hole in the Law and it is up to the authorities concerned to consider how this matter can be rectifid for the future. For all these reasons the cross-appeal of the Prosccution is   liereby dismissed.


Date : 29th December, 1965