İSTİNAF KOMİSYONU HUZURUNDA

      Between : Hüseyin Ziya Demircioğlu, Nicosia
                          
                                                     and

      Turkısh Municipality of Nicosia


                                                    					        (Appeal No. 6/66)




         Belediye sınırları içinde izinsiz iş  yapma - Fasıl 240  Belediyeler Yasasının 156. maddesine aykırı izinsiz iş yapma – İş  yapmanın anlamı - Sanığın iş yapmadığını fakat bir işverenin yanında çalıştığını iddia etmesi - Sanığın işvereni ile yaptığı  sözleşmeye göre kendi adına iş  yapma olanağına sahip olması   – Yaptığı  işler göz önünde  bulundurulunca sanığın işçi olmadığı fakat yanında çalıştığı  işverenin işine  katıldığı  sonucuna varılması.
         İş yapmanın izne tabi olması – Fasıl 240 Belediyeler Yasası madde 56. aykırı izinsiz iş yapma suçu.

JUDGMENT

         The appellant was convieted by the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry of  the offence of "carrying on a trade" within the municipal limits of the Turkish Municipality of Nicosia, contrary to sections 156 and 18,7 of the Municipal Corporations Law, Cap. 240.  The Commission of Inquiry, dischar      ged the accused with a caution and ordered him to pay, presumably under   section 184 of Cap. 240, the fee determined by the council of the Municipal   Corporation in question.

          The appellant has appealed against this conviction on the ground that   he was not "carrying on a trade" during the period in question and had not,  therefore, committed any offence under seetions 156 and 187 of Cap. 240,   as charged. The respondent Municipal Corporation, on the other hand, in
reply to the memorandum of appeal, has submitted that there was ample  evidence before the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry for finding that the appellant was in faet "carrying on a trade" as charged in the charge-sheet during the material period. The respondent in its written reply to the memo      randum of appeal, analyses in paragraph 5 thereof, the three detailed categaries of evidence on which the respondent submits the Cornmission of Inquiry was justified in finding that appellant was "carrying on a trade".

          It is clear from a persual of the written memorandum of appeal and  the written reply thereto, as well as from the oral arguments submitted  at  the  hearing of this appeal, that the whole case turns on whether or not there was evidence on which the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry could properly
find that the appellant was "earrying on a trade" during the material period   in question.

          The judgement of the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry, which is a very  brief one, is mainly based on the written agreement which had been entered    into between the appellant and .the Nicosia merchant  Mr. Hüseyin Irfan,  with whom the appellant worked, which is dated the l7th June, 1951, and  which was produced in evidence as Exhibit 5.

        It is provided, inter alia, in Exhibit 5 that the appellent shall be the  managing director ("mesul müdür") of the business firm of  Hüseyin Irfan  and that the appellant shall receive 25 % of the profits of the business with  a guaranteed minimum of £ 120 a year. Paragraph 5 of Exhibit 5 also makes  certain provisious with regard to the appellant's rights to all agencies held  by the firm in the event of Hüseydin  Irfan's death or withdrawal from the firm. The appellant is also given certain option rights under Exhibit 5 to  purchase the stock of the business on the occurrence of either of the said  two events.

        After carefully considering the evidence before the Nicosia Cammission  of Inquiry as a whole and the written and oral  arguments  submitted by learned counsel for the appellant and the respondent, we are of the opinion tahat it was open to Nicosia Commission of Inquiry to came to the    conclusion, which it did, on the evidence before it, that. the appellant was  "carrying on a trade" ln the sense of section I56 ol Cap. 240, within the  municipal limits of the Turkish Manicipality of Nicosia during the period  between the Ist January 1965 and the 30th November 1965, as charged in
the charge-sheet.

        It was held by the supreme Court, in the case of  The American Export Lines v. The Mayor, etc. of Larnaca (19.C.LR. 206) that the words “carrying on or exercising a trade or business" should be given their ordinary meaning. In that case the Supreme Court expressed the view (at page 209) that -

           "There is no need to do more, than give the words their ordinary  meaning, when it is clear that the appellant are carrying on business within the wide  provisions of section 259" (now section 156  of Cap. 240).

       Had this been a simple case of an employee working for a salary for a person or institution which is carrying on or exercisin; a trade or business and who is precluded by the terms of his angagement from doing any other work, it migth well have been said to tbe authority of Robbins v. Commissioners of Inland. Revenue. (1920) 2 KB. 677. that such a salaried full-time employee was not himself carrying on or exercising the trade ar business of his employer. where, however, as in this care, the person concerned, as well as being a managing director, also has guaranteed to him under a  written agreement a 25% share of the prolits of the business of his "employer", and also has certain other rights and privileges as to agencies and stocks  in certain events over and above those usually given to a salaried employee, then, in our opinion such person must be said to be participating  in the “carryıng on of the trade" of the person or instuition in question to a  greater degree  than an ordinary employee,and must,therefore himself be held  also to be carrying on such trade. In this connection it is pertinent  to note the case of Marsh v. CommissFoners of Inland Revenue  (1943) 1 All  E.R.199) the head-note of which reads as follows:-

           "The appellant was employed by P. and P. as a commemercial traveller on a basis of salary and commission on orders taken; he  also travelled for other firms with the permission of P. and P.           Prom these other firms the appellant received commission on the  orders he obtained The appellant was assessed to excess profits   tax on the ground that he was carrying on a trade or business as                                 a commercial traveller and contended that there was no evidence  on which the commissioners  could find that he was carrying on     a business at all :-

           HELD : (i)  if the plaintiff had been employed solely by P. and  P., he could not be held to be Garrying on a trade or business; but  because he acted for other firms thero was evidence on which the   commissioners could conclude that he was carrying on the business of a commercial traveller and he was, therefore, assessable  to excess profits tax in respect of that business.

                        (ii)  The remuneration received from P. and P. was not  to be excluded from the standard prafits."
       

           In Marsh's case, as in the present case before us, the person concerned was entitled to receive a commission with a guaranted minimum,  but an unlimited maximum. Moreover, the appellant in the present case does not  appear to be prohibited by Exhibit 5 to earry an or exercise any trade or
business an his own account, whereas in lVlarsh's case the person concerned used to obtain  the permission of his employers before he could carry on or   exercise any other trade or business.

           Having regard to the nature and contents of Exhibit 5 and to the evidence before  the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry as a whole,  we did not consider it necessary, in the circumstances and in view of the conclusian to   which we have come in this judgment, to accede to the respondent's request   to hear the evidonce of Mr. Hüseyin Irfan under section 25 of the Courts of  Justice Law, 1960, who was ill at the  time af the hearing of this case by the   Nicosia Commission of Inquiry and who was not able to give evidence at the   time.

         We do not consider it necessary, for the purposes of this judgment,to analyse in detail the evidence regarding the extent of the appellant's connection in the importartation  and sale of certain quantities of maise during the  period nection with certain cold storage  activities or the extent of his participation in  question.

        We are of the opinion that the relationship of the appellant to the business firm of Hüseyin Irfan, as evidenced by Exhibit 5 and generally by the oraI testimony at the  trial, coupled with the contributary or subsidiary evidence reIating to the cold storage astivities in question and the transactions   concerning the importation and sale of maise, when considered as a whole, more than amply justified, in our view, the finding by the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry that the appeIlant was in fact "caraying on a trade" in the  sinse of section I 56 of Cap. 240 as charged, and we, as an appellate tribunal, can see no good reason for disturbing such findings of fact by tha Nicosia Commission of In guiry.

        In conclusion we would add that, in any event,  it would  have been open to the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry, in exercise  of the powers vested  in it by section 85 (4) of the Criminal Procedure Law, (Cap. 155) at the  conclusion of the hearding to convict the appellant of the offence of carying  an or excercisin any `business', or the offence of carryin; on or excercising  any ‘calling’, if the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry had found on the facts  that the appellant, as managing director of  business firm of Hüseyin Irfan, had not been “rrying a trade" but had been excercising a “business” or excercising a `calling.'  It would also have been open to this tribunal to  substitude such alternative convictions under the  provisions  of  section  145(1) (c) of the Criminal Procedure Law, (Cap. 155), should  we  have come to the conclusion that the evidence had not supported a conviction for “carrying on a trade" but had supported a conviction for excercising a “business” or ‘calling’.

         It appears that as the appellant did not apply to the Municipal Council for a licence as provided in section 157 of Cap. 240, the Council proceededunder section 158 of Cap. 240 and determined the fee to be payable by the  appellent. This decision of the Municipal Council cannot be challenged be  fore the Nicosia Commission of Inquiry or before this tribunal in these proceedings.

       For all the reasons given above, this appeal cannot succeed and is here by dismissed accordingly.



   3rd August, 1966.