İSTİNAF KOMİSYONU HUZURUNDA

       İstinaf eden : Yılmaz Cüneyit,
                                       ile
       Aleyhine istinaf edilen : Türk Emniyet Müdürlüğü
                                                               							 arasında.

                                                                                            (İstinaf No. 8/66, Dava No. 615/66)




           Tecavüz -  Ahlâka aykırı tecavüz - Fasıl 154 Ceza Yasasının 151. maddesine aykırı tecavüz - Sanığın şikâyetçiyi iyi niyetle öptüğünü iddia etmesi - Öpme fiilinin suç olması için ahlâka aykırı bir niyetle yapılması gereği - Sanığın  öpme fiilini ahlâka aykırı bir niyetle yaptığına dair  İlk Mahkeme bulgusunun davanın gerçekleriyle bağdaşması ve hatalı olmaması.



JUDGMENT

            The appellant was convicted of indecently assaulting Suna Osman, a  girl under the age of 13, contrary to the provisions of Sections 151 and 35 of the Criminal Code, Cap. 154. he was fined £.10.-  and was bound  over in the sum of £25 for one month to keep the peace and be of good       behaviour.
         
           The salient facts of this case are adequately set out  in the judgement  of the trial Court, and we do not consider it necessary to repeat them again  or the purposes of this judgment. Suffice it to say that of the several aets  of indecent assault alleged by the prosecution and by the complainant in her  evidence, the learned trial judge, after correctly directing  and  cautioning   himself as regards the question of corroboration in cases of this nature, only   found that there was corroboration with regard to the kissing of the complainant by the appellant on the cheek. As pointed out by the learned  trial  judge in his judgment (at p. 29 of the Record), corroboration "at least of    the kissing of the complaznant by the Aecused on the cheek  exist inthe statement of the Aecused to  the police and his evidence before the Court." We are, therefore, of the opinion that there was sufficient corroborative evidence  on which the trial Court could properly have come to the conelusion which    it did that the appellant had kissed the complainant on the cheek and we  can see no reasori whatsoever for disturbing this finding of the trial Court.

           The learned trial judge, for the  reasons  given  in  his  judgment   (p. 29 - 30) came to the eonclusion that the kissing of the conıplainant by  the appellant was "not in good faith" Having come to this conclusion  the    learned trial judge proceeded to ask himself  the  question  "whether this
i.e. the kissing on the cheek in bad faith) does amount to an indecent as - sault" (p. 30) Having posed this question the learned trial judge in the ensuing paragraph of his jud.gement proceeded to distinuish the present ease   from the facts of two cases which had been cited to him by learned counsel   for the appellant and  which are referred to in the said paragraph, but did    not however, proceed to set out, in so many words, the exact grounds and   the reasoning on which he came to the conclusion that the kissing on the  cheek which, as stated above, he had found to have taken   place "not in  good faith", amounted in law to an "fndecent assault" on the complainant for the purposes of Section 151 of Cap. 154.  It might be useful at this point to cite the following passage from a   footnote on pp. 183 -184 of Kenny's Outlines of Criminal Law, l7th Edition :-

            "A question has arisen which has caused differences of opinion:
             is an indecent act essential to this offenee, or does it suffice that
            an assault, decent in itself, was committed with an indecent aim?
            Tlıe former view was taken  by  the  Supreme Court  of New
            Soath Wales(S. v. Culgan (1898) l9T.S.W. 160), who held it not
            sufficient tlıat the accused had `tried ta drag'. the protecutri to a
            place where he could have intercourse with her; and by that of
            South Africa (R.v. Abrahams (1918) C.G.H. 590).  But the con-
            trary view was adopted by the Suprema Court of Ontario (R.v.
            Chang (19I5) 32 Ontario 66), who held that `an indecent assault
            is an assault which has in it an element of indecency', even a me-
            rely mental one. Lord Esher (then Brett, J.) in the case of Col.
            Valentine Baker (The Times, 20 July and 3 Aug. 1875) took the
            latter view, by instructing the grand jüry that `If a man kisses a
            young woman against her will, and with feelings of earnal pas -
            sion and with a view of aratify his passions or to excite hers, that
            would be an indecent assault. The kisses of young people in sea-
            sons of universal gaiety are not indecent, but kisses given by a
            man under the influence of carnal passlon are indecent.'  There
            must be a hostile act accompanied with cireumstanees of inde -
            cency an the part of the prisoner; Beal v. Kelley (1951)  2 All
            E.R. 763; and see Fairclough v. ohipp (I951) 2 All E.R. 834.
            (T.A.C.); D.P.P. v. Rogers (3953) 1 W.L.R. 1017."

        It is in our opinion abundantly ciear from tlıe authorities on this point, most of which have been cited to us by the 1earned counsel on both sides, that whether or not a particular assault is "indecent" for tbe purposes of the  statutory provision in question depends on the "circumstances of indecency    on the part of the prisoner towards the person assaulted" (vide Archbold  35th Edition parag. 2921 at p. 1167). It will be seen, therefore, that as in  the case of all criminal offences generally. it is the intention of the appellant  at the time he committed th·e assault in question which determines whether or not such an assault is or is not an "indecent" one for the purposes of the    statutory provision in question.

       It should be observed that in this partiacular case the very nature of the   physical assault, even irrespective of the element of intention, being the kissing of a female child by a male on the cheek, is itself of such a nature as  to be accompanied by feeline-s of pasion or affection by tiıe person kissing    towards the person kissed. The very act of kissing necessarily implies a mental feeling of affection, of one category or other, towards the person kissed; whether it be a son or daughter a sister or aunt or a wife or lower. The question which arises, therefore, in this ease is whether the kissing was ac-    companied by innocent feelings of affection towards the young girl (such as ,sould be felt by e.g. a parent or other member of a girl's family) as alleged  by the  appellat, or whether the appellant kissed tha young girl with inde cent intentlon as alleged by the prosecution.   ,

          'The Iearned triel judge, having come to the conclusion that the appellant had not, as alleged by him, kissed the complainant on the oheek in good   faith, and having come to the conclusion that he was unable to believe the  appellant's contention in this respect, he found the accused, "in all the circuzmrstances of the case", as pointed out by him in his judgment at p. 31 of  the Record, to be quilty of indecent assault as charged.  It is true that as   satd earlier in this judgment the learned trial judge has not expressly set  out the legal reasoning on which he came to the conclusion that such kis     sing  on the cheek in bad faith amounted in Iaw to an indecent assault on the complainant; we are of the opinion, howver, that there was ample evidence     before the learned trial judge on which he could have come to the conclusion which he did that  the kissing by the appellarıt of the complainant on   the cheek was not in fact in good faith and that the appellant, in all the circumstances; had an indecent  intention in kissing the girl.

          without being exhaustive, we can point out that in addition to the reasons given by the learned trial judge (at pp. 29 - 30) the element of indecent  intention on the part of the appellant may also be found (1) in the faet that  the uncle of the complainant Mehmet Erdel Ziya, who is himself an elemen      tery  school teacher, testified that he used to see, ever since September 1965,  the appellant and the complainant talking furtively to each other alone, and  parting company whenever he, the witness, approached them. It was due  the anxiety felt by  this witness that tho complainant was romoved from Ortaköy school to köşklüçiftlik  school; (2) in the contents of the several   statements made by the appellant to the police and the faet that in his first   statement of the 7th May 1966 he even donied kissing  he  complainant  whereas in his subsequent statements and in his evidonce on oath before  the  Court his admitted kissing the appellant on the check on several occassions; (3) in the testimony of Zeki Gündüz  to the effect that when the witdıess, who is an  inspector of Elementary Schools, üuzuostioned the appellant,  the  appellant  the latter did not admit that he ever embrared or kissed the complainant   even as  a teacher or a father.

           It might  be convenient at this stage to deal with the suhmission of the learned  counsel  for the appellant that as the appellant was found guilty and  convicited of indently assaulting the complainant "on one occasion only",   it must follow that the said "one occassion" must have been the one occassion  which  the complainant referred in her evedence  i.e. the occasion on which the complainant referred in her evidence i.e. the occasion on which the complainant stated that the appellant  kisses  her for the first time on the    cheek. Counsel for  the appellant also submitted that even if this Court were    to accept that thore was more than one occasion on which the  appellant      kissed the complainant on the cheek, this Court should regard the occasion most favourable to the appellant as being the occassion in respect  of which the appellant waqs convicted,i.e. the first occasion referred to by the complainant. We would point out in this connection, however thatwe  we should not lose sight of the particular reason why  learned trial judge thought fit to fit to enter a conviction in  respect of  "one occasion only"; this reason is given by the judge in the last paragrph of his judgment i.e. because the charge contained only one count.  The fact that the learned judge felt, having regard to the existence of only a single count, that he could   only  confine himself to a single conviction in respect of "one occasion only", does not in our opinion , render in admissible the evidence before the Court as a whole, and  in particular the evidence of  the appellant himself that he had  kissed the complainant on the cheek  on many occasions, in decidingl  whether or not  the kissing of the complainant on the  cheek  on any one of tha  occasions referred to by the appellant was accompained by an indecent  intention.We do not agreee with the submission of the counseI for the appellant that, because the appellant was corıvicted of kissing  the complainant "On one  occasion only”, the judge necessarily intended to convict in respect  of the  occasion referred to by the complainant. İn the absence of anyindication to contrary  in the judgment, the convıction in respect “on occasion only” could be  in respect of any one of the several occasions admitted by the appellant.

          In Rv. Chalk, (1961, Crim..Law Review 326), the accused  was tried on six counts of indecent assault; the issue broadly was whether the admitted conduct of the accused was accompanied by indecent intention.  The  Jury convicted on one of several counts only. The Court of Criminal appeal, in dismissing the appeal, held that the Court would never substituted its own  opinion for that of the jury.

            Having carefully considered the able arguments put forward by the learned counsel on both sides and the various authorities cited by them, we have come to the conclusion  that there was ample evidence  before  the Iearned trial judge an which he could properly find, as he did, that the kissing of the complainant by the appellant on the cheek was,  in  aII the circumstances, accompanied by indecent  intention, and acting o n theprinciple laid sown in Rv. Chalk (supra)we do not think it would be prober for this appellate tribunal to upset the finding of the excistence of lndecent intention made by the trial Court, after it had the advantage of seeing aII the witesses and observing their demeanour, and to substitute our own opinion in  this respect.

             For all the reasons given  above, we are of the opinion  that this appeal  against conviction cannot succeed and is hereby  dismissed. Although we  think that perhaps the sentence might be on the  Ienient side, we  consider that, in all the circumstances, this is not a case in wich alteration of the senterce by an appellate tribunal is warranted.

            The appeal is therefore dismissed. Conviction and sentence to stand.


    3rd September, I966.