D1/92                                                                     Yargtay/Asli Yetki No: 2/92
(M/sa Ar Ceza Dava/stida No: 576/91)

Yksek Mahkeme Huzurunda
Mahkeme Heyeti: N. Ergin Salhi, Taner Erginel, Metin A. Hakk.

Mstedi: Taner Hastan, Merkezi Cezaevi  Lefkoa
			ile
M/aleyh: Kuzey Kbrs Trk Cumhuriyeti Basavcs,
                Hukuk Dairesi, Lefkoa.
                                                                            A r a s  n d a.

Mstedi namna: Gne Mente
Mstedaaleyh namna: Yaar Boran



K A R A R

N. Ergin Salhi: Sayn Metin A. Hakknn hazrlam olduu kararn okuma frsatn buldum. Bu kararda serdettii grler ve vard netice ile hemfikirim. Ancak baz hususlara da deinip aklk getirmeyi luzumlu grmekteyim.

	Progative Orders bal altnda grlen ve kkeninde Common Law aresi olan Certiorari ve Prohibition emirleri Sayn Yarg Metin A. Hakknn kararnda derledii gibi Yksek Mahkemenin kararlarna kar kullanlacak areler olmayp yarg veya yar quasi judicial yarg yetkisi kullanan Mahkeme vey komisyonlarn kararlarna kar Yksek Mahkemece kullanlabilen denetim yetkisidir. 

	Ancak bu gibi emirleri Yksek Mahkemenin Yargtay olarak kulland yetkilere dier bir ifade ile istinafen kullanlan yetkiye paralel olarak kullanabildii baz itihat kararlarnda grlmektedir. Z. M. Necatigil Administrative Law isimli eserin 306. sayfasnda Channel Coaling Co. v. Ross (1907) 1 K.B. 145, ve R. v. Comptroller General of Patents (1953) 1 All E.R. 862, at p. 865deki itihat kararlarna atfta bulunarak u gre yer vermektedir:
	In deciding whether or not to grant an order of prohibition or certiorari, the court will not be fettered by the fact that an alternative remedy exists to correct the absence or excess of jurisdiction, or that an appeal lies against the absence or excess.

	Ancak baz hallerde Certiorari ve Porhibition emirleri, istinaf yetkisi kullanan Yargtayn yetkilerine paralel olarak Yksek Mahkemece kullanlmas sz konusu olmasna ramen R. v. Peddington Valuation Officer and Another, ex parte Peachey Porperty Corporation Ltd (1965) 2 All E.R. 836, at p.840daki iihat kararnda Lord Justice Denningin deindii gibi Yasada mevcut olan bir arenin kullanlmasnn uygun olmamas veya bu alternatif olarak grlen kanuni arenin kullanlamaz veya faydal, tesirli bir ekilde kullanlmas sz konusu olmad hallerde Certiorari ve Prohibition emirlerine bavurulmasnn uygun olabilecei grn belirtmitir. Keza ayn kararda Mahkeme, Certiorari ve Porhibition emirlerini verirken bu gibi emirlerin verilmesinin dourabilecei neticeleri de Mahkemenin dnerek, iyi deerlendirilmesinin gerektii vurgulanmtr. Lord Justice Denning, sz edilen kararda, 5 balk altnda zetledii prensipleri faydal olaca dncesi ile bu karara aktarmay uygun buldum.

I. What is the proper?
      The first question is whether the remedy by certiorari or mandamus is open at all, seening that there is a remedy given by statute. The statutory remedy is contained in s.40 to s. 49 of the Local Government Act, 1948, as amended by s.1 and s.3 of the Lands Tribunal Act, 1949. Summarised, the remedy is this: the applicants, if they are aggrieved, are entitled to make proposals for the alteration of the valuation list. They can propose alterations, either downwards or upwards. On the one hand, they can ask that the values on their own Park West flats, be reduced. On the other hand, they can ask that the values on other peoples flats in converted houses be increased. If the valuation officer does not agree to the proposals, the applicants can appeal to the local valuation court. If that court decides against them, they can appeal to the Lands Tribunal. The decision of the Lands Tribunal is final, save that one point of law there is an appeal to the Court of Appeal: and thence, in turn, with leave, to the House of Lords.

		Counsel for the first respondent contended strongly before us that, as Palriament had provided this specific remedy, the applicants ought to go by it. There was a code of procedure, he said, specially designed by Parliament, to deal with grievances such as these. That was their proper course. Indeed their only coursde. Such specific remedy being given, they could not resort to the remedy of certiorari or mandamus. He supported this contention by reference to Pasmore v. Oswald- twistle Urban District Council (1), R.v. City of London Assesment Committe (2) and Stepney Borough Coucil v. John Walker and Sons, Ltd. (3). Now these cases certainly warrant the proposition that, if the applicants ere attacking the assessment of any one aprticular hereditament, or any small group of hereditaments, such as all the houses in a particular terrace, their only remedy would be that statutory remedy. By which I mean that, if and in so far as the are attacking particular assessments within a valid valuation list, they must go by the remedy with Palriament has provided, namely, to make proposals to alter those assessments. But if and in so far as they are attacking the valuation list itself and contend are attacking the valuation list itself and contend that the whole list is invalid (as they do), then I do not think that they are confined to the statutory remedy; for the simple reason that the statutory remedy is in that case nowhere near so convenient, benefical and effectual as certiorari and amndamus. I suppose that in theory the applicants might make proposals for the alteration of every one of the 31,656 hereditaments in the list, but that would in practice be impossible. Counsel for the first respondent conceded this; he suggested, however, that a few test cases might be taken, and proposals could be made for altering those few assessments, and a decision given by the Lands Tribunal. But one side or the other might not agree on what should be taken as test cases. And in any case the procedure would be most deficient because there could be no discovery against the occupiers. I am, therefore, of opinion that the existence of the statutory remedy is no bar to this application. The case falls within the general principle that the jurisdiction of the High Court is not to be taken away without express words; and this applies both to the remedies by certiorari and mandamus (see Re Gilmores Application (4), and also to the remedy by declaration (see Pyx Granite Co., Ltd. v. Minister of Housing and Local Government (5).

II. Is the applicant a party aggrieved?
     The second question is whether the applicants are persons aggrieved so as to be entitled toa sk for certiorari or mandamus. Counsel for the first respondent contended that they are not persons agrrieved because, even if they suceeded in inereasing all the gross values of other people in the Paddington ara, it would not make a pennyworth of difference to them. Strange as it may seem, owing to the way expenses are borne in the County of London, the rate pondage of Paddington would remain the same even if thea ssessment of the falts in cverted houses were greatly increased. If the flats in converted houses were gretly increased. If the assessments were increased by 1,000,000, the rate poundage would be reduced by a penny. I do not think that grievances are to be measured in ponds, shillings and pence. If a ratepayer or other person finds his name included in valuation list which is invalid, he is entitled to come to the court and apply to have it quashed. He is not to be put off by the plea to have it sufferd no dmage,a ny more taht the voters were in Ashby v. White (6). The court would not listen, of course, to a mere busbody who was interfering in things which did not concern him. Unit will listen to anyone whose interest are affected by that has been done, just as it d,id in R.v. Thames Magistrates Court, Ex p. Greenbaum (7), and in A.-G. Of Gambia v. NJie (8). So here it will listen to any ratepayer who conplains that the list is invalid.

III. Are certiorari and mandamus available?
      The third question is whether certiorari and mandamus are available in respect of a valuation list. The Divisional Court (9) thought that they were; and counsel for the respondent did not contend otherwise. The first respondent is a public officer entrusted with a public duty. He has legal authority or power to determine questions affecting the rights of subjects, namely, to assess the values of hereditaments. This power carries with it the duty to act judicialy, which means, I think, fairly and justly in accordance with the statute. If the declines or fails to carry out this duty, he is amenable to mandamus; and the list itself is liabel to quashed on certiorari: see R. v. Electricity Comrs., Ex p. London Electricity Joint Committee Co. (10); R. v. Manchester Legal Aid Committe , Ex p. R.A. Brand and Co., Ltd. (11); Ridge v. Baldwin (12).

IV. The resulting chaos.
	The fourth question is what is to happen if the valuation list is quashed. It was said that it would  be a nullity from the beginning. The rating  authority would have to go back to the 1956 list which was based on 1939 values; see s. 34 (2) of the Local Government Act, 1948. It would be necessary, it eas said, to unravel all the assestments and payments since Apr. 1, 1963. The result would be chaos. I do not accept this at all. It is necessary to distinguish between two kinds of invalidity. The one kind is where the invalidity is so grave that the list is a nullity altogether. In which case there is no need for an order to quash it. It is automatically null and vaid without more ado. The other kind is when the invalidity does not make the list void altogether, but only voidable. In that case it stands unless and until it is set aside. In the present case the valuation list is not, and never has been a nullity. At most the first respondent -acting within his jurisdiction- exercised that jurisdiction erroneously. That makes the list voidable and not void. It remains good until it is set aside.

		 It bears no brand of invalidity on its forehead. Unless the necesary proceeding are taken at law to establish the cause of invalidity and to get it quashed or otherwise upset, it will remain as effective for its ostensible purpose as the most impeccable of orders:

	See Smith v. East Elloe Rural District Council per LORD READCLFEE (13). No, doubt if the list is invalid altogether, certiorari must in due course go to quast it. But I see no reason why a mandamus should not issue in advance of the certiorari: of R. v. Cotham (14). If the existing list has been complied on the wrong footing the court can order the first respondent to make a new list on the right footing. (The passage of time is no bar: for counse for the first respondent concedes that the requirement for it to be prepared by Dec. 31, 1962, was directory only and not mandatory.) Once the new list is made and is ready to take effect, the court can quash the old list. In that case everything done under the old list will remain good. The rates that have been demanded rule that where a voidable transaction is avoided, it does not invalidate intermediate transaction which were made on the basis that it was good; see the cases collected in Director or Public Prosecutions v. Heal (15). By this solution, all chaos is avoided. The existing list will remain good until it is replaced by a new list: and then it will be quashed by certiorari. But I think that then it must be quashed. You cannot have two lists in being at the same time. The DIVISIONAL COURT (16) took the view that certiorari was a necessary pre-requisite to mandamus. I do not think that it is a pre-requisite. Certiorari will be necessary some time, but only when the now list is ready to take effect, So we have to be sure that certiorari will lie.

V. On what grounds will certiorari lie?
	The fifth question is the most important of all. On what grounds will certiorari lie to quash a valuation list? The Divisional Court (16) thought that it would only lie for excess of jurisdiction or error of law on the face of the list. But the word jurisdiction in this context has innumerable shades of meaning. Some advocates are prone to say that; whenever a tribunal or other body decides wrongly, it exceeds its jurisdiction. It has only jurisdiction, they say, to decide rightly, not to decide wrongly. This is too broad a view altogether. I would say that, if a tribunal or body is quilty of an error which goes to the very root of the determination, in that it has approched the case on an entirely wrong footing, then it does exceed its jurisdiction. There were magistrates refused to issue summonses, in spite of the evidence, because they thought that it was undesirable for the prosecution to go on, it was held that was tantamount to declining jurisdiction: see R. v. Adamson (17). And when the Board of Educationa failed to determine the questions asked of them, but answered another not put to them, it was held that they had declined jurisdiction: see Board of Education v. Rice (18). Again when licensing justices refused ana application on a ground not open to them, it was held that  they had exceeded their jurisdiction; see R. v. Weymouth Lisensing Justices, Ex p. Sleep (19). These cases confirm me in the view which I expressed in Baldwin and Francis, Ltd. v. Patents Appeal Tribunal (20):

		.. if a tribunal bases its decision on extraneous considerations which it ought no to have taken into account, or fails to take into account a vital consideration which ought to have taken into account, then its decision may be quashed on certiorari and a mandamus issued for it to hear the case afresh. 

	nmzdeki meselede, Magosa Ar Ceza Mahkemesi nnde yarglanan sank Fasl 154 Ceza Yasasnn ilgili maddeleri ve zellikle 331, 333(a) ve 370(b) maddeleri altnda sulu bulunarak 3 yl 3 ay hapse mahkm edilmitir. Sank ilkin, hem mahkmiyet hem de ceza aleyhine istinaf dosyalam, daha sonra istinafta, kendi iradesi ile mahkmiyet aleyhindeki istinaf geri ektiinden lk Mahkemenin konu maddeler zerinden vermi olduu mahkmiyet kesinlemitir. Mstedi sann, yapm olduu Certiorari ve Porhibition istidalarnn kabul edilmesi halinde hem Yargtayda grlmekte olan ceza aleyhindeki istinafa ve dolaysyle istinafn yetkilerine mdahale etmi olacamz gibi sz edilen emirlerde Mstedi sann muvaffak olmas halinde lk Mahkemenin mahkmiyet karar ve dolays ile cezann ortadan kalkmas anlamna gelecektir ki sank serbest braklacak ve bu durumda Yargtay grlmekte olan ceza aleyhindeki istinaf grmekten engellenmi olacaktr.

	Certiorari ve Prohibition emirleri yukarda deindiim gibi yarg veya yar yarg yetkisi kullanan Alt Mahkeme veya komisyon kararlarna kar Yksek Mahkemece kullanlabilen bir denetim yetkisidir. Yksek Mahkeme ilem ve kararlarna kar kullanlmas sz konusu deildir. Bu durumda baz istisnai hallerde yasann gsterdii arelere, nmzdeki meseledeki gibi istinaf yolunun seilmi olduu durumlarda buna paralel olarak Certiorari ve Prohibition emirlerine mracaat edilmesi mmkn olsa dahi, bu paralel yetkinin Yksek Mahkemenin kendi ilevlerini ortadan kaldrmaya ynelik olarak kullanmasna yasal olanak bulunmad gibi sz edilen emirlerde bahsedilen arelerin domasna neden olan ana ilkelere de terstir. Bu nedenlerle mstedi sann Prohibition mracaatnn reddedilmesi gerektii grndeyim.

Taner Erginel: Metin A. Hakknn serdettii grler ile vard neticeye katlrm. Ayrca Sayn Yarg Ergin Salhinin ek grlerini de paylamak-taym.

Metin A. Hakk: Mstedi, 6.5.1992 tarihinde Yksek Mahkemeye dosyalad ibu bavuru ile Gazi Mausa Ar Ceza Mahkemesinde aleyhine getirilen 576/91 sayl davada mahkm edildikten sonra 3.5.91 tarihinde arptrld 3 sene 3 ay hapis cezalarnn uygulanmasn nlemek amac ile bir prohibition emri verilmesini talep etmitir. Bavurunun kkeninde yatan olgular ihtilf konusu olmayp aadaki ekilde zetlenebilir: Mstedi, Gazi Mausa Ar Ceza Mahkemesinde aleyhine getirilen ve 42 itham (count) ieren 576/91 sayl bir dava ile Fasl 154 Ceza Yasasnn 370(a), 370(b), 20, 331, 333(a), 334 ve 337. maddeleri ile 37/83  sayl Gmrk ve stihsal Yasasnn 37, 38, 39(1)(a), 190(1)(b) ve 191(2) maddelerine aykr olarak 15.10.87 ile 22.9.1989 tarihleri arasnda, aleyhine getirilen ithamnamede teferruat gsterildii gibi Devleti gmrk, G.K.K. katk pay ve gelir vergisinden mahrum edecek ekilde 42 ayr su ilemekle itham edilmitir. Mstedinin aleyhine getirilen davalarn 30 tanesi Fasl 154 Ceza Yasasna 12 tanesi de 37/83 sayl Yasaya istinad ettirilmitir. Mstedi, sz konusu davalarn hibirini kabul etmemi neticede Mahkeme, ddia Makamnn ard 18 tan dinleyip Mahkemeye ibraz olunan 29 adet emareyi incelemi ve keza Mstedinin o davada sank olarak kutudan mdafaa olarak sunduu yeminsiz beyan ile Mdafaann ard 5 tan da dinledikten sonra, Mstediyi aleyhine getirilen 42 davadan da sulu bularak mahkm etmitir. Mstedi avukatnn hafifletici nedenler ile ilgili olarak Ar Ceza Mahkemesine yapt hitabeyi de deerlendiren Mahkeme Mstediyi mahkm edildii 10 davadan 1 sene , 10 davadan 2 sene 6 ay, 10 davadan da 3 sene 3 ay, 12 davadan ise herhangi bir cezaya arptrmadan sadece mahkmiyet kaydedilmesine emir verip, hapislik cezalarnn birlikte ekilmesini emretmitir. Mstedi, avukat vastas ile 10.5.91 tarihinde hem mahkmiyet hem de ceza aeyhine Yargtay olarak oturum yapan Yksek Mahkemeye 37 istinaf sebebi ieren Yargtay/Ceza 16/91 sayl bir istinaf dosyalamtr. Mezkr istinaf yargtayn nne duruma amac ile muhtelif defalar gelmi ve 29.1.92 tarihinde Mstedi mahkmiyet aleyhine olan istinaf sebeplerini Yksek Mahkemenin izni ile geri ekmi ve sadece Ar Ceza Mahkemesinin verdii ceza aleyhine olan ve arptrld cezann hafifletilmesine ynelik 3 istinaf sebebi zerinde durmutur. Mezkr istinafn durumas Yargtayn 13.5.92 tarihli oturumunda neticelenmi ve karar iin bilmddet ertelenmiti.

	Bavurunun olgularn yukardaki ekilde zetledikten sonra bavurunun karara balanmasnda etkisi olabilecek baz yasal prensiplere de gz atmada fayda vardr. lk olarak unu vurgulamada yarar grrz ki Mstedinin mahkm olduu 42 davann bazlar Fasl 154 Ceza Yasasna bazlar da 37/83 sayl Yasaya istinad etmesine ramen, sank herhangi bir ayn (same) eylemden dolay hem Ceza Yasas hem de 37/83 sayl Yasa altnda 2 defa mahkm olmamtr. Dolaysyle Ar Ceza Mahkemesi Anayasamzn 18. maddesi tahtnda ve Fasl 1 Interpretation Law madde 37 altnda herhangi bir hata yapmamtr. Ehemmiyetine binaen Fasl 1in 37. maddesine bu kararda aynen yer vermeyi uygun grdk.

Sz edilen 37. madde aynen yledir:

37. Where an act or omission constitutes an offence under two or more Laws, the offender shall, unless the contrary intention appears, be liable to be prosecuted and punished under either or any of those Laws, but shall not be liable to be punished twice for the same offence.

	Mstedinin esas iddias udur ki konuya amil 37/83 sayl zel Yasa dururken Genel Yasa olan Fasl 154 Ceza Yasas altnda da mahkm edilmemeli ve cezaya arptrlmamal idi ve 37/83 sayl Yasa ile mahkm edildikten sonra arptrlabilecei azami hapislik cezas 2 yl iken Fasl 154 Ceza Yasas altnda 2 seneden teye arptrld hapislik cezalar yanltr. Bunun iin Mstedi Mahkemeden 2 senenin tesindeki hapislik cezalarnn uygulanmasn meneden bir emir talep etmektedir.

	Bu iddiay deerlendirmek ve Mstedinin bavurusunu karara balamak iin Yksek Mahkemenin prohibition emir verme yetkisinin incelenmesi gerekir. Yksek Mahkemenin gerektiinde ve uygun grd hallerde prohibition isdar etme yetkisi Comon Lawdan kayanklanmaktadr. Nitekim, konuya ilikin olarak Halsburys Laws of England, 4th ed., Vol.37, sayfa 432, paragraf 567de Nature of Judicial Review bal altnda aynen yle denmektedir:

Judicial review is the process by which the High Court exercises its supervisory Jurisdiction over the proceedings and decisions of inferior courts, tribunals and other bodies or persons who charged with the performance of public acts and duties.
................................................................................................................ ................................. This juriscdiction was originally derived from the common law, and was exercised by the issue of the prerogative writs of mandamus, certiorari and prohibition, but it is now conferred and regulated by statute and rules of court. (underline supplied).

K.K.T.C. Mahkemelerinin de tadil edilmi ekli ile 9/76 sayl Mahkemeler Yasasnn 38. maddesi mucibince uygulamakla ykml olduu mevzuat arasnda Common Lawunda yer aldna kuku yoktur. Yksek Mahkemenin Common Lawdan neet eden uygun grd hallerde prohibition emri verme yetkisi Anayasamzn 151. maddesi ile de garanti altna almtr. Anayasamzn 151. maddesinin (3) fkras aynen yledir:

(3) Yetkisiz tutuklamann kaldrlmas iin emirname (Habeas Corpus), bir yetkinin kullanlmasn salamak iin emirname (mandamus), herhangi bir mahkeme veya yarg niteliinde yetki kullanan herhangi bir makamn yanl bir kararnn uygulanmasn nlemek iin emirname (Prohibition), bir makamn herhangi bir yetkiye dayanlarak igal edildiinin soruturulmasna ilikin emirname (quo warranto) ve herhangi bir mahkeme veya yarg niteliinde yetki kullanan herhangi bir makamn kararnn iptali iin emirname (certiorari) karmaya mnhasran Yksek Mahkeme, Yargtay olarak yetkilidir. 

Prohibiton isdar etme yetkisinin kkenine ve tarihesine bakldnda yasal durum Halsburys Laws England, 4th Edition, Vol. 1(1) sayfa 203 paragraf 111de aynen yle izah edilmektedir:

Historically certiorari and prohibition lay to control the judicial functions of inferior courts and tribunals. However, they have today developed to become comprehensive remedies for the control of both judicial and administrative determinations of inferior courts, tribunlas, public authorities and any other body of persons.
	The orders cannot be directed by the High Court to any tribunal which is a branch of the High Court for the purpose of quashing or prohibiting its proceedings. ....
(underline supplied).

Yukardaki iktibastan da grlebilecei gibi tartma konusu olmayacak kadar sarihtir ki Yargtay olarak Yksek Mahkemenin uygun grmesi halinde isdar edebilecei prohibition emirleri sadece alt Mahkemeler veya Yksek Mahkemenin dnda yarg yetkisi kullanan organlar ile snrldr. Bir baka deyile Yargtay, Yksek Mahkemenin verdii herhangi bir emrin infazn prohibition emri vererek durduramayaca gibi Yksek Mahkemenin nndeki bir davaya da prohibition emri vererek mdahale etme yetkisine haiz deildir. Bunu Yargtayn yapmaya almas yanl olduu gibi hukuki dayanaktan da yoksundur.

	Yukarda zetlemeye allan hukuki prensipler erevesinde bu bavurunun olgularna bir gz atldnda bu prohibition bavurusunun dayand ve ierdii ayn olgular ve ikyet edilen ayn Ar Ceza Mahkemesi kararnn Yargtayn nndeki Yargtay/Ceza 16/91 sayl istinafa da konu olduu ve henz  karara balanmad bir gerektir. Bu gerek karsnda bu mahkemenin talep edilen prohibition emrini vermesine olanak yoktur. Bu nedenle bavurunun daha ileri gitmesi de olanakszdr dolaysyle bu bavurunun iptal edilmesi kanlmazdr. Yukardakiler muvacehesinde Mstedinin bavurusunu daha derinine inip incelememiz gereksizdir ve byle bir ilem akademik eksersizden teye bir gayeye hizmet etmiyecektir.  Netice olarak bavurunun reddedilmesi gerektii grndeyim.

	Meselenin tm ahval ve eraitini gz nnde bulundurarak masraflarla ilgili herhangi bir emir vermemeyi uygun grmekteyim.

N. Ergin Salhi: Netice olarak benim ek grlerim ve oy birlii ile Mstedinin yapm olduu prohibition mracaatnn reddedilmesine oybirlii ile karar verilir.

	Masraflar konusunda herhangi bir emir verilmez.



(N. Ergin Salhi)                (Taner Erginel)                              (Metin A. Hakk)
      Yarg                                 Yarg                                           Yarg


30 Haziran 1992
