

i
8 CAP. 41. ,
TYPRUS
e
CHARITIES
.
,
CHAPTER 41 OF THE LAWS
:  ,;
1959 EDITION
\,
e
i
PRINTED BY
c. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV. LONDON, W.1.
(Appointed by the Gove1'nment of CYP1'US the Gove1'nment P1'inte1's of this Edition.
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.J
1959

o
CHAPTER 41.
CHARITIES.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Seetian Page
1 Short title 2
2 Upon application of trustees of any charity Governor may grant
8certificate ofincorporation 2
3 Property to vest in body corporate 3
4 Particulars respecting application for certificate 3
5 Nomination of trustees and filling of vacancies 3
6 Liability of trustees notwithstanding incorporation 4
7 Certificate to be evidence of compliance with requisition ...4
8 Duty for certificate 4
9 Gifts to charity before incorporation to have same eHect afterwards 4
10 Accounts to be fumished by trustees 4
11 Audit of trustees' accounts 5
12 Enrolment of deeds. ere. 5
13 Powers of Supreme Court 0 .0. 6
14 Parties to proceedings 0.0 ...6
15 Court to apply English law 000 o.. 0.0 6
16 Power to make Rules of Court 000 00. o.. 6
To MAKE PROVISION FOR THE PROTECTION OF CHARITIES.
1949Cap.59. [27th March, 1925.]
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Charities Law.
Uponappli- 2. It shall be lawful for the trustees for the time being of
cation of
lý.tfdt.IL't.t'
fibIitrustees of any c an y or e uca 10na, 1 erary, sC1en ý  c or pu c
a?y charity charitable purposes to apply in manner hereinafter men-
~~;e~~~t tioned, to the Governor fo~ a certificate of registration of th.e
~ertificate of trustees of any such chanty as a  corporate body; and ýf
~f~~:ora- the Governor in Council shall consider such incorporation
expedient, he may grant such certificate accordingly, subject
to such conditions or directions as he sha1l think fit to insert
8in the certificate relating to the qualifications and number of
the trustees, their tenlife or avoidance of office and the
mode of appointing new trustees ;  and the trustees of such
charity sha1l thereupon become a body corporate by the
name described in the certificate, and sha1l have perpetual
succession and a  common seal, of which the device sha1l be
approved by the Governor, and power to sue and be sued
in their corporate name, and to hold, acquire, transfer,
assign and demise any movable or immovable property for
the purposes of such charity.

8 "" CHARITIES. [CAP. ~---~
3. The certificate of incorporationshall vest in such body Pr°t~rtYbtdo .ves ýn oy
corporate all the movable and ýmmovable property belong- corporate.
ing to or held by any persap or persons in trust for such
charity, and thereupon any person or persons in whose
name or names any stocks, funds, securities or immovable
property sha11 be standing in trust for the charity, shall
transfer the same into the name of such body corporate.
4. Every application to the Governor for a certificate Particu.lars
-under this Law shall be in writing, signed by the persons ~~S::::ti;n
., making the same and shall contain the fo11owing particu- for certifý-
lars : -cate.
(a) the objects of the charity and the rules and regula-
tions of the same, 'together with the date of and
parties to every deed, wi11 or other instrument
creating, constituting or regulating the same ;
(b) a statement and short description of the property,
movable and immovable, which at the date of
the application is possessed by or belonging to or
held on behalf of such charity ;
(c) the names and residences of the trustees of such
charity ;
(d) the proposed title of the corporation;
(e) the proposed device of the common seal, which sha11
in all cases bear the name of incorporation.
5. (1) Before a certificate of incorporation sha11 be Nfotmintation
.
IIo rus ees
granted, trustees of the chanty shall have been effectua y and filling of
appointed in pursuance of the terms of any deed, wi11 or vacancies.
other instrument creating the charity to the satisfaction
of the Governor.
(2) When a certificate of incorporation sha11 have been
granted vacancies in the number of the trustres of such
-charity shall from time to time be filled up so far as sha11 be
., required by the constitution or settlement of the charity, or
by any such conditions or directions as aforesaid, by such
legal means as would have been available for the appoint-
ment of new trustees of the charity if no certificate of
incorporation had been granted or other\vise as shall be
required by such conditions or directions as aforesaid, and
the appointment of every new trustee shall be certified by
or by the directian of the trustees to the Administrative
Secretaiy upon the completion of such appointment.
(3) Within one month after the expiration of each period
c. eS

i
4. GAP: 41.) CHARITIES. G
of fýve years af ter the grant of a certifýcate of incorporation
or whenever required by the Gove~or areturn shaU be
made to the Administrative Secretary by the then trustees
of the names of the trustees at the expiration of each such
period with their residences.
;ia~ility of 6. Af ter a  certifýcate of incorporation has been granted
:o~~::- under the provisions of this Law, all trustees of the charity,
standinf. in- notwithstanding their incorporation, shall be chargeable for
corpora ýon. such property as shall come into their hands, and shall be
8answerable and accountable for their own acts, receipts,
neglects and defaults and for the due administration of the
charity and its property in the same manýýer and to the
same extent as if  no such incorporation had been effected.
~erti~cate to 7. The certifýcate of incorporation shall be under the hand
o; ::~_ence and official seat of the Governor, and shall be published in
plia~c.e .with the Gazette, and shall be conclusive evidence that all the
requýsýtýon. preliminary requisitions herein contained and required in
respect of such incorporation have been complied with, and
the date of incorporation mentioÝýed in such certifýcate shall
be deemed to be the date at which incorporation has taken
place.
Dut~ for 8. For every certifýcate of incorporation granted under
~e:;ý2~7~~: this Law there shall be charged a duty of fýve hundred mils.
Gift~ to 9. Af ter the incorporation of the trustees of any charity
~~~~ý: pursuant to this Law every donation, gift, and dispositian of
incorpora- property movable or immovable theretofore made to or in
tion to have
ffhh.hhfh.
same effect avour O suc c anty or t   e trustees t  ereo, or ot erwýse
afterwards. for the purposes thereof, shall take effect as if  the same had
been made to or in favouT of the incorporated body or
otherwise for the like purposes.
Accoun~s to 10. The trustees of any charity incorporated under the
8~  ~~~~:~ provisions of this Law shall in books to be kept by them for
that purpose reguýarly enter or cause to be entered full and
true accounts of all moneys received and paid respectively
on account of such charity, and shall alsa at the end of every
year prepare and transmit to the Administrative Secretary
the following accounts :-
(a) an account of the gross income arising or which
ought to have arisen for the benefýt of the
charity during the year ending on the 31st
day of December then last ;

8 CHARITIES. [C~P. 41. 5
(b) an account of all balances in hand at the com-
mencement of every year, and of all moneys
received during the same year, on account of the
charity ;
(c) an account for the same period of all payments;
(d) an account of all moneys owing to or from the
charity so far as conveniently may be,
which accounts shall be certifýed under the hand of one or
8 more of the said trustres.
11. The Governor may at any time order that the
trAUdtit  O~
ffh..ddusees
accounts o the trustees o any c anty 1ncorporate un er accounts.
the provisions of this Law shall be audited by the Director
of Audit or such other person or persons as he may
deem fýt to appoint.
12: (1) Every deed, w.ill or other instrumen~ creating a ~:~~:n:t~~Of
chanty shall be enrolled ýn the office of the Regýstrar of the
Supreme Court.
(2) Such enrolment shall be effected by the depositing
with the Registrar of the Supreme Court of the deed, wiIl or 2 of 14/43.
other instrumeni :
Provided that where adeed, will or other instrumeni has
been executed out of the Colony a copy thereof duly certifýed
as in subsection (3) hereof may be deposited ingicad of the
original.
(3) A copy of adeed, will or other instrumeni executed
out of the Colony shall be deemed to be duly certifýed if
certifýed as a true copy thereof by a British Consular
Authority or by a  notary public.
8 (4) Adeed, will or other instrument creating a  charity
may be certifýed in the Colony by a  Registrar of a  District
Court or by a Certifying Officer appointed under the provi-
sions of the Certifying Officers Law. Cap. 39.
(5) A copy certifýed by the Registrar of the Supreme
Court to be a true copy of adeed, wiIl or other instrumeni
deposited in his office or to be a true copy of any copy of a
deed, will or other instrumeni executed out of the Colony
deposited in his office shall be received as evidence of the
contenis and enrolment thereof.
el (2)

i
~ CAP. 41.] CHARITIES. 9
Powers of 13. The Supreme Court shall have power and jurisdic-
Supreme tion-
Court.
30/10/34. (a) to enforce every trust created for a charitable
purpose ;
(b) to give all such directions and make all such orders
as may appear to it necessary or expedient for
the administration of any trust created for a
charitable purpose ;
(C) to sanction the sale or other disposition of any
property subject to a  charitable trust on being 8
satisfýed that such sale or disposition is for the
benefýt and advantage of the charity.
Parties to 14. (1) The Attorney-General shall be a party to all
proceedings proceedings under this Lawand may at any time stay such
4 0/10/34. proceedings and compromise or authorize the compromising
of any matters in dispute. No compromise made without
the authority of the Attorney-General shall be valid.
(2) All proceedings under paragraph (a) of section 13 shall
be instituted by the Attorney-General.
(3) Any proceedings under paragraph (b) or (c) of section 13
may be instituted by the Attorney-General or by the
trustees of the charity if  authorized by him in writing.
Court to 15. All proceedings under this Law shall be instituted,
appl~ lý i heard and determined by the Supreme Court in accordance
~:J1~~/3:~' with the law relating to charitable trusts for the time being
in force in England.
Power to 16. The Governor, with the advice and assistance of the
~~e ý:ýules Chief justice, may from time to time by writing under the
o ou. hand and offýcial seal of the Governor and the han d  of the
Chief justice make Rules of Court for the better execution
of this Lawand in particular-
8(a) for regulating the pleading, practice and procedure
of the Supreme Court ;
(b) for regulating and prescribing the fees to be taken or
charged by the Registrar of the Supreme Court ;
(c) for regulating and prescribing the fees to be taken
by advocates.