

8 i
C~P. 43.
CYPRUS
8
CINEMA TOCRAPH FILMS
CHAPTER 43 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by tke Government of Cyprus tke Government Printers of tkis Editian
of Laws witkin tke meaning of tke Evidence (Colanial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959
c. il

~ oc ,CAP. 43.] CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS. ~
,,\:. .ý:~,,'~:
CHAPTER 43.
CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title .,. 2
82 Interpretation 2
3 Establishment of Board of Censors 2
4 Appointment of Censorship Committees 3
5 Censorship of films 3
6 Censorship of poster$ 4
7 Interdiction of approved films and posters 4
8 Duties and powers of Censorship Committee 4
9 Appeal to Board 4
10 Search for unauthorized film 5
11 Remuneration of Secretary and Assistant Secretary 5
12 Ref\l~!Ý <;ýf duties of Customs 5
13 Regwations 0 5
14 Penalties ...00. 6
15 Saving 0 .00 6
A LAW TO PROVIDE FOR THE BETTER REGULATION AND
.CONTROL OF PUBLIC CINEMATOGRAPH EXHIBITIONS,
AND FOR THE PURPOSES CONNECTED THEREWITH.
1949 Cap. 61.
35 of 53. " [29th March, 1935.]
24 of 57.
Short title. ý. This Law may be cited as the Cinematograph Films
Law.
Int.erpre- 2 In this Law
tatýon. .,
"  Board "  means the Board of Censors appointed by
the Governor under section 3  (1) of this Law;
"exhibition," with its cognate expressions, of a
cinematograph film means an exhibition to which the
public are admitted and includes the production of any
8music, song, speech or other sound whatsoever which
accompanies the projection of a cinematograph film;
"  poster" means any bill, figure, notice, picture or
photograph advertising any exhibition, but sha1l not
ÝncIýýde such classes or kin ds of advertising matter as
the Governor in Council may by Regulations made
" .under. this Law exempt from censorship. '
Establish-
ment of ..3. (1) .T4ere sha1l be established a Board of Censors
~~::~r~f consisting of such persons as may, from time to time, be
2  of 35/53.

8 CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS. [CAP. 43. 3 i
,
appointed by the Goveroor, and the Goveroor may at any
time revoke any such appointment.
(2) The Goveroor shall appoint a  President and a Vice-
President and a  Secretary of the Board from among the
members and may, if  he thinks fit, appoint an Assistant
Secretary from among the same.
(3) In the absence of the President from any meeting of
the Board, the Vice-President or, in his absence, such
-pers.on as the members. present may appoint, shall be the
., Chaýrman of such meetmg.
(4) During the absence of any member of the Board from
Cyprus the Goveroor may appoint any person to be tem-
porarily a  member of the Board during such absence.
(5) Any vacancy in the Board sha1l be fý1led by the
Goveroor.
(6) The determination of any question before the Board
shall be according to the opinion of the majority of the
members present.
(7) In the case of an equa!ity of votes the Chairman of
the meeting of the Board sha1l have a  casting vote in
addition to his own vote.
(8) Six members of the Board shall form a quorum:
Provided that for the purpose of determining an appea!
under section 9  of this Law, three members of the Board
shall form a quorum.
4. (1) The Board sha1l appoint one or more Committees, Appoint-
each c?nsisting of three of its me~bers, to be Censorship ~::S~~:hip
Commýttees for the purposes of thýs Law. Committees.
2 0[24{57.
(2) Whenever for any reason a  member of the Board
8 appointed to be a  member of a  Censorship Committee is
unable to serve on the Committee, the President or, in his
absence, the Vice-President, may appoint another member of
the Board as a member of theCommittee to take' the place
of such member.
5. No person shall present or exhibit or a1low to be Censorship
presented or exhibited any cinematograph film or part of of films.
a film unless such film shall have been previously approved
by a Censorship Committee or, on an appea! under section 9
of this Law, by the Board.
il (2)

4 GAP. 43.J CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS.,( e
~nsorship 6. No person shall display or distribute or calise. to be
o posters. displayed or distributed any poster unless the same has
been approved by a  Censorship Committee or, on an appeal
under section 9  of this Law, by the Board.
Interdiction 7. (1) The Board may at any time by notice withdraw any
~~~~~oded approval given by a  Censorship Committee and thereafter
posters. no person shall present or exhibit any film or shall display or
distribute any poster to which such notice relates.
(2) The notice to be given under this section shall be 8
given to the person who submitted the film or poster to be
approved or to any person in possession thereof:
Provided that if  neither of such persons can be found the
notice may be given by publication in the Gazette.
Duties and 8. (1) It shall be the duty of a  Censorship Committee to
powers of .
dfilmdb.d.
Censorship examýne an censor every an poster su mýtte to ýt
Committee. for approval in accordance with the Regulations made under
this Law.
(2) Whenever the Censorship Committee shall approve
any film or poster it shall signify its decision in the pre-
3 of 35/53. scribed form and may also affix on such film or poster an
identification mark recording its decision.
(3) The Censorghip Committee may approve part of a
film whilst disapproving another part thereof, and may give
such directions in the matter and may so act as it  shall think
proper for the purpose of giving effect to its decision.
(4) A film to which any matter has been added af ter it
has been approved shall be again submitted for approval,
and until it  has again been approved shall be deemed not to
have been approved.
(5) When a  Censorship Committee has refused to approve
any film OT part thereof, and an appeal against such refusal
8has not been instituted under section 9 of this Law, the
Committee may retain such film or excise and retain such
part untiI its exportation trom Cyprus or untiI it  is otherwise
disposed of in accordance with the direction of the Com-
mittee, and the Committee shall have the Iike powers where
an appeal against such refusal has been dismissed.
Appeal to 9. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision of a Censor-
Board. ship Committee may, within twenty-one days of the
notifýcation of such decision, appeal to the Board whose
decision thereon shall be final and conclusive.

8 .CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS. [CAP. 43. 5 i
(2) No member of the Censorship Committee from which
an appeal is made shall sit as a  member of the Board for
the purpose of determining such appeal.
10. Any police ofl1cer of any rank not lower than that of Search fo;
tb.t.
fid  thh.b liunauthonzed
sergean oi). eýng sa ýs e at t   ere ýs reason to e  eve film.
that a film or part of a film not authorized for exhibition in
accordance with the provisions of this Law has been or is
being exhibited in any building or place may without
8warra~t at any time enter and search such building or place
and seýze any film or part of a film reasonablv suspected to
be exhibited without such authority.
11. (1) The Governor may authorize to be paid to the ~emunera-
Secretary and to an Assistant Secretary such remuneration as ~~~e~~ry
he may determine in respect of their services under this Law. and
Assistan t
(2) Notwithstanding anything in the Municipal Corpora- Secretary.
tions Law, or in ariy amendment thereof, contamed, the Cap. 240.
Governor may by Order to be published in the Gazette
direct that, in part payment of the remuneration of the
Secretary and of an Assistant Secretary, such Municipal
Corporations as may be named in such Gýder shall contribute
annualIr a sum not exceeding sixty pounds m such pro-
portions and in such manýýer and at such time as may be
specified therein.
(3) Every Gýder made under subsection (2) hereof shall
be binding on the Municipal Corporation s named therein.
12. Where- Refund of
(a) a  Censorship Committee has refused to approve a  ~ut~es of
film and an appeal against such refusal has not us oms.
been instituted under section 9 of this Law or
an appeal has been institute d but has been
dismissed by the Board, and
8(b) the film which has not been approved is to be ex-
ported from Cyprus,
any duties of Custom s  which have been paid in respect of
such film shall, at the request of the exporter and af ter the
film has been exported, be refunded to the exporter:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not
apply to any film which has been partýr approved and
exhibited.
13. The Governor in Council may make Regulations for ~egula-
carrying into effect the purposes of this Lawand, without 4~f~5/53.

~_CAP. 43.] CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS. G
prejudice to the generality of the power so conferred, in
particnlar for-
(a) prescribing the fees to be paid for any matter or
thing to be done under this Law or any Regula-
tions made hereunder;
(b) prescribing the forms to be used for any matter or
thing to be done under this Law or any Regula-
tions made hereunder;
(c) prescribing the conditions and the procedure with
respect to the submission of films or posters for 8
.approval and to the grant of such approvaland
the terms, conditions and restrictions thereof or
rela ting thereto;
(d) exempting from censorship any kind or class of
advertising matter;
(e) prescribing any other matter required to be pre-
scribed under the provisions of this Law;
(f) providing for the imposition of penalties not ex-
ceeding fifty pounds fine for any contravention
of, or failure to compir with, any of the Regula-
tions made herennder or decision taken under
such Regulations and for forfeiture of any film
or poster in respect of which the contravention or
failure has been made.
Penalties. 14. Any person who-
(a) acts in contravention of section S, 6 or 7 of this Law;
or
(b) obstructs in the lawful execution of his duty any
police offýcer authorized to act under section 10
of this Law,
shall be guilty of an offence and sha1l be liable to a fine not
exceeding fifty pounds and the Court may order that any
fi~ or poster in tesP.ect of which such offence has been com-
8mýtted shall be forfeýted.
Sayingo 15. Any cinematograph film in respect of which a  permit
has been obtained from the Board established under the
Order in Council No. 148S, made the Sth day of August,
1932, and published in the Gazette of the 12th August, 1932,
shall be deemed to be a  cinematograph film approved and
marked by a  Censorship Committee under the provisions of
this La,w,