

e CAP. 44.
(YPRUS
8
COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY
CHAPTER 44 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTEP BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRl':'-FTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
IAppointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of tiýis Edition
of Lal.tls within th~ mç~r1ing of thp Evidence (Co~oniaý Statutes) ol! ct, 1907.]
ý959

~ CAP. 44.]COMMISSIONS OF INQUIR. G
ÇHAPTER 44.
COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title 000 000 000 00. 000 2
2 Power of Governor to appoint Commission and invest it  with powers 2
83 Contents of Order of appointment o.. 000 o.. 2
4 Oath of office by Commissioner .00 000 ..0 3
5 Division of opinion of Commissioners o o o o o o o o o 3
6 Assessors 0.0 000 o.. 00. 000 3
7 Powers with which a  Commission mav be invested 00' 000 3
8 Implicated persons, etco, may be represented 00. 00. 4
9 Allowances to members of Commission, ete. o.. 0'0 4
10 Vacancies in a Commission 000 000 000 5
11 Recovery of fines 000 ...00. 000 5
12 Rules .00 00' ...00. .0' 5
1949Cap.64. [14th May, 1942.]
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Commissions of Inquiry
Law.
Power of 2. (1) The Governor shall have power-
Governor to
(  ).
br\-
dC..fI. appoint a to, appoýnt, y VI er, a ommýss1on o nquýry,
Co
dm~isSio
tnOtconsisting of one of more Commissioners, to
an mves ý .
dh.
bfd.
with powerso consý er suc questýons as may e  re erre to ýt
by the Governor and to report thereon to him;
(b) to invest the Commission with powers as in this
Law provided.
(2) Every Order made under this section shall be published
in the Gazette.
g~~:~noý: of 3. ~very Order made, under the preceding section shall
8appoint- contaýn-
mento (a) the name or names of the member or members of
the Commission ;
(b) the appointment, in cases where more than one
Commissioner is appointed, of the Chairman of
the Commission ;
(c) the terms of reference to the Commission ;
(d) the names of any persons who by reason of their
expert knowledge of the subject matter of the
inquiry or otherwise may be required by the

8 -COMMlSSIONS OF INQUIRY. [CAl:». 44. 3 i
Goveroor to sit as assessors wiili the Com-
mýssýon ;
(e) the powers with which the Commission is invested
in accordance with the provisions of this Law.
4. It shall be the duty of each Commissioner ap-pointed Oath of
under this Law to make and subscribe an oath that he will ~:~ý
faithfully, fully, impartially, and to the best of his ability sioner.
discharge the trust, and perform the duties devolving upon
8him by virtue of such Commission, which oath may be
taken before the Goveroor, or before such person as the
Goveroor may appoint, and shaU be deposited with the
Administrative Secretary.
5. if the Commissioners shall, in any cage, be equally Diyi~ion of
d..d  d.ht.d.thdiopýnýon of
ývý e on any questýon t   a anses urýng e procee ngs Commis-
of the Commission, the Chairman of the Commission shal1 sioners.
have a  second or casting vote.
6. The services of any assessors shall be consultative Assessors.
only; assessors shall be entitled to be present at every
meeting of the Commission, but they shall not sign the
report of the Commission.
7. A Commission appoint~d under the provisions of this Po;:c:ýrs with
Law shall have such of the following powers as are conferred ~~m~sion
,upon it by the Order of appointment required by section 2 ~ay b
te
dfh"Lýnves e .
O t   ýs aw-
(a) to procure all such evidence, written or oral, and to
ekamine all such persons as witnesses as the
Commission may think it necessary or desirable
" .
to procure or examme ;
(b) to require the evidence, whether written or oral,
of any witness to be made on oath or declaration,
8such oath or declaration to be that which could
be required of the witness if he were giving
evidence in a  Court of law;
(c) to summon any person residing in the Colony to
attend any meeting, of the Commission to give
evidence or produ~e any document in his
possession and to ekamine him as a  witness or
require him to produce any document in his
possession, subject to all just exceptions ;
(d) to issue a  warrant to com~1. the attendance of any
person who, af ter having been summoIied to

4 CAP. 44.] COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY. 8
attend, fails to do so, and does not excuse such
failure to the satisfaction of the Commission,
and to order him to payall costs which may have
been occasioned in compelling his attendance
or by reason of his refusa! to obey the summons,
and also to fýne such person a  sum not exceeding
five pounds ;
(e) to fine in a sum not exceeding five pounds any
person who, being required by the Commission
to give evidence on oath or declaration or to
8produce a  document, refuses to do so and does
not excuse such reflisa! to the satisfaction of the
Commission :
Provided that, if  the witness objects to answer
any question on the ground that it  will tend to
incriminate him, he shall not be required to
answer the question nor be liable to any penalties
for refusing so to answer ;
(f) to admit any evidence, whether written or oral,
which might be inadmissible in civil or criminal
proceedings ;
(g) to admit or exclude the public from any meeting
of the Commission ;
(h) to admit or exclude the press from any meeting of
the Commission ; .
(i) to award any person who has attended any meeting
of the Commission such sum or sums as in the
opinion of the Commission may have been
reasonably incurred by such person by reason
of such attendance.
.
Implicated 8. Any person whose conduct is the subject of inquiry
~:so~:, etc., under this Law or who is in any way implicated or concerned
rep~esented. in the matter under inquiry shall be entitled to be
8represented at the whole of the inquiry, by an advocate or
such other person as the Commission may, at its discretion,
give leave t9 appear, and any other person who may
consider it  desirable that he s40uld be so represented may,
by leave of the Commission: be represented in the manýýer
aforesaid.
Allowances 9. There shallbe paid out of the revenue of the Colony-
to members
of. C.om- (a) any sums awarded by a  Cominission under section
mýssýon, etc. 7  (i) of this Law;

8 COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY. [CAP.44.5 i
(b) any grants which the Governor may make by way of
remuneration to members and assessors of a
Commission.
10. (1) In the event of the death of any of the members Vacancie;s in
fC..fh .b.da Commýs- or assessors o any ommýssýon or o t   eýr eýng prevente sion.
by ilI-health or otherwise from taking part in the investiga-
tions of the Commission, the Governor may fýll any vacancy
so caused by an Order of appointment made in accordance
Ý- with section 2  of this Law.
(2) The investigations of the Commissian shall continue
notwithstanding that such a  vacancy as aforesaid shall not
be fýlled and, if it shall be fýl1ed, the investigations made
prior to such vacancy shall not be reopened or recapitulated.
11. Fines imposed under any of the provisions of this Law Recovery
shall be recovered in the same manner as fýnes imposed by of fines.
a Court of law.
12. The Governor may make Rules- Rules.
(a) regulating the procedure of Commissions appointed
under this Law;
(b) generally for the carrying jnto effect of the
provisions of this Law.
Ý-
i