

.."C.I...,", ""',i '.
CAP. 45.
(YPRUS
8
CONT ACIOUS DISEASES (ANIMALS)
CHAPTER 45 OF THE LAWS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959

2 CAP.45.J CONTAGIOUS DISEASES (ANIMALS). e i
;
CHAPTER 45.
CONT AGIOUS DISEASES (ANIMALS}.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
ý Short title 2
82 Interpretation 2
3 Declaration of infected place .., 2
4 Powers of Governor 2
5 Declaration of freedom from infection 4
6 Governor may delegate his powers 4
7 Notice of disease 4
8 Compensation for animals slaughtered 4
9 Oflences and penalties 5
ýo Remedy for neglect to comply with this Law 5
ýý Inspectors' written report to be received in evidence 6
FOR PREVENTING THE SPREADING OF CONTAGIOUS OR
INFECTIOUS DISEASE S AMONG ANIMALS.
ý949Cap.65. [28th june, 1880.J
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Contagious Diseases
(Animals} Law. -
~~~.rpreta- 2. In this Law-
tt animals "  means bulls, cows, oxen, heifers, calves,
camels, horses, mules, asses, sheep, goats, swine, dogs
and poultry.
Declaration
3ThGft.tt' .f.hof infected .e overnor may rom ýme o ýme notý y  ýn suc
place. manýýer as he may think fýt any district or area or place
within any area to be a  place infected with animal disease,
~wers of 4. (l} The Governor may from time to time make such 8
vernor. general or special Orders as he thinks fýt for the following
purposes or any of them-
(a} for the slaughter of any animal within an infected
district, place or area ;
(b} for prohibiting or regulating the movement of
animals in or out of an infected district, place
or area ;
(c} for prescribing and regulating the isolation or
separation of animals being in an infected
district, place or area ;

8 CONTAGIOUS DlSEASES (ANIMALS). [CAP. 45. 3 i
~ -
(tl) for prohibiting or regulating the remova! of
carcases, fodder, litter, dung or other things into,
in, or out of an infected district, place or area;
(e) for prescribing and regulating the destruction,
burial, disposal or treatment of carcases, fodder,
litter, dung or other things being in an infected
district,place or area, or removed thereout ;
(i) for prescribing and regulating the cleansing and
8disinfecting of infected places or areas or parts
thereof ;
(g) for prohibiting or regulating within any infected
district, place or area, the placing or keeping of
animals on common Qr unenclosed lands, or in
fields or other places insufficiently fenced or on
the sides of highwa ys ;
(h) for prohibiting or regulating the holding of markets,
fairs or sales of anima!s in public or private
places where animals may be exposed for sale ;
(i) for prohibiting or regulating the carrying, leading or
driving of animals on highways or thoroughfares
or elsewhere;
(j) for prohibiting or regulating the moving, driving,
sending or carrying of anima!s or of dung or
other things likely to spread disease;
(k) for prohibiting the landing from vessels of any
animals, carcases, homs, hi des, bones, fodder,
.litter, dung, or other things brought from any
foreign country or inland port;
(1) genera11y for the purpose of in any manner prevent-
ing the introduction into the Colony or the
spreading therein of any conta@ous or infectious
disease affecting animals ;
8(m) for th.e appointment, payand regulation. of the
dutýes of persons to be charged wýth the
execution of any provisions or orders made by
virtue of this Law.
All such Orders for the time being in force shall be
considered to be- part of and of the same forçe and effect as
though they had been incorporated in this Law.
(2) The Governor may from time to time make Regula-
tions for prescribing and regulating the destruction, burial,
disposal or treatment of the carcases of any animals dying
from any contagious disease whatever ;

4. CAP. 45.J CONT AGIOUS DISEASES (ANIMALS). 8 i
! r
Providedthat any expenditure thereby incurred ma,y, if  in
the opinion of the Goveroor the needy circumstances of the
owner require it, be defrayed from the Department of the
Accountant General.
Dfefclardation 5. The Governor may from time to time notify in such
o ree om
hh.
k fid..Ifrom manner as e  may t   ýn t, any ýstnct or area or p ace
infection. within any area as being no longer infected, and thereupon,
save as otherwise by such notification provided for, any
general or special order that may have been given under the 8
provisions of this Law, shall, so far as it  affects that district
or area or place, cease to have effect.
Governor
6ThGf.t.b..dmaydelegate ..e ovemor may rom t~e. to ýme y wntmg un. er
his powers. hýs hand, deplite to any Commýssýoner, or Officer of Polýce,
or other person or persons designated in such writing, all or
any one or more of the powers and authorities vested in him
by this Law.
~°:Ý~:ase. 7. When the existence of any contagious or infectious
disease has been publicly notifýed in the Gazette and
published by crier in the villages, every person having in his
possession or under his charge an animal that may reason-
ably be supposed to be affected with any contagious or
infectious disease shall, as far as practicable, keep it  separate
from animals not so affected, and shall with all practicable
speed give notice of the fact of the animal being so affected
to the Commissioner or other authority of the district
wherein the animal so affected is; and if without lawful
excuse, proof whereof shalllie on him, he fails to keep the
animal so affected, or supposed to be, separate from all
others not affected, or to give such notice as is  hereinbefore
required to be given, he shall be liable to a fýne not exceeding
five pounds or to be imprisoned for any term not exceeding
8.one month with or without hard labour.
C;ompensa- 8. Where any animal not actually diseased shall, under
~ý:~~~ the authority of this Law have been slaughtered the owner
slaughtered. thereof shall be entitled to recover such sum, not exceeding
ten polinds, as may equal three~fourths of the value of the
animal slaughtered, which shall be levied proportionately
upon the payers of immovalýle property tax of the district
in which the animal was slaughtered :
Provided that no such owner shall be so entitled unill he
has proved before a  Court of competent jurisdiction in the~

e -~~:::-~:=~~=:--:~ 45 :- -i
pres en ce of the Commissioner, or his representative, and ;to
the satisfaction of the Court, the slaughter of any beast
belonging to him which was not actuaIIy diseased and the
value of the beast, and has obtained judgment from the
Co urt against the Commissioner as the representative of the
district for the amount which the Court may consider him
entitled to claim in pursuance of the provisions hereof:
Provided also that where it  is proved to the satisfaction of
the Coutt that the slaughter of an animal in respect of
8which compensation is  claimed has been rendered advisable
or necessary by the Wiliul contravention by any person of
the provisions of this Law, the Court may order the recovery
of the money awarded in compensation from the person so
contravening the provisions of this Law, in exoneration so
far as may be of the inhabitants of the district from which
the compensation is  claimed.
9. (1) Any contravention of any of the provisions of this Offenc.es and
Law or any obstruction to any officer or person appointed to penalties.
execute this Law may be punished by fine for a  first offence
not exceeding five polinds, for the second offence not
exceeding ten polinds, and for a third offence not exceeding
twenty pounds; and any person who shall have in his
possession or under his care any beast which he knows to be
infected or diseased, or shall have any beast within a
district, place or area notified to be infected with animal
disease and who shall wiIfully disobey or neglect to act in
obedience to the provisions of this Law, and any person who
shaII knowingly selI or deal with any beast diseased or
infected, or coming from an infected district, shaII be liable
to imprisonment (either in substitution for or in addition to
the fines above specified) for any term not exceeding for the
first offence three months, for the second offence six months,
and for the third offence twelve months. Any portion of
any fine imposed under the provisions of this Law may be
8 awarded by the Court imposing it  to the person upon whose
information the conviction is  obtained.
(2) Any contravention of any Regulation made under
su bs ec tion (2) of section 4 sh all render the offender li abI e to
the penalties imposed by this section.
10. In every cas e where an in sp ector of ca ttI e disease or Remedy for
the Com mis si on er of a  District shaII find that any of the ~~~~~; t~th
provisions of this Laware not compIied with, he may this Law.
himseli do or ca use to be done all thin gs necessary for giving
c. gl

6 CAP.45.] CONTAGlOUS DlSEASES (ANIMALS). G i
full effect thereto; and all expenses thereby incurred by
him shall be recoverable from the person by whose neglect
or default they were occasioned.
In~pectors' ý ý. The written report of an inspector of cattle disease
:~~ý:ý~o shall be taken as evidence against any person by the report
!>e re~~ived charged with any contravention of the provisions of this
ýn eVi ence. Law; and the presence of the inspector at the hearing of
the charge shall not be necessary; but an inspector who
wilfully makes any false accusation in any report shall be
8liable to the same penalties as though he had given false
evidence on oath.
8