

1
O--.i
CAP. 47.
CYPIUS
8
CRUEL TY TO ANIMALS
CHAPTER 47 OF THE LAW S
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY. LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Gove,.nmentof Cyp,.us the Gove,.nment P,.inte,.s of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statules) Act, 1907.]
1959

:'!'~' CAP.47.] CRUEETY TO ANIM O i
,
CHAPTER 47.
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS,
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title , 2
2 Interpretation 2
83 Acts and omissions which amount to cruelty and penalties therefor ...2 .
4 Penalties for malicious killing and wounding , 3
5 Compensation for damage done by cruelty to animals ...3
6 Governor in Council may make Regulations 4
7 Reward to informer , 4
S Complaints to be made within one month 4
9 Disposal of fines 4
10 Power of Court to deal with animal , ...5
11 Cost of detention and treatment 5
12 Court may deprive person convicted of cruelty of ownership of animal 5
FoR THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
1949 Cap.68.
[15th F ebruary1910
]18 of 54. ' ,
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Cruelty to Animals Law.
I~terpreta- 2. In this Law-
tion.
ii  animal" means any domestic or captured animal or
bird.
Ac~s ~nd 3. (1) if any person sha11-
omýssýons
(  )IIbk'kili'dd. which a crue y eat, ýc, -treat, over-rý e, over- rýve,
amount to over-load torture infuriate or terrif
yan
ycruelty and ."'.
penalties ammal, or sha11 cause to procure, or, bemg the
therefor. owner, permit any animal to be so used, or sha11,
2 of 18/54.
bIbld.,tt' y  wanton y  or unreasona y omg or omý mg
to do anyact, or causing or procuring the
8commission or omission of anyact, cause any
unnecessary sufferiýýg, or, being the owner,
permit any unnecessary suffering to be so
caused to any animal; or
(b) conver or carry, or cause or procure, or, being
the owner, permit to be conveyed or camed,
any animal in such manýýer or position as to
cause that animal any unnecessary suffering ;  or
(c) wilfu11y, without any reasonable cause or excuse,
administer, or cause or procure, or being the

8 ; CRUELT: T~ ANIMALS. [CAP.47. 3 i
owner permit, such administration of, any i
poisonous or injurious drug or substance to II
any animal, or shall wilfully, without any
reasonable cause or excuse, cause any such
substance to be taken by any animal; or
(d) subject, or cause to procure, or being the owner
permit, to be subjected, any animal to any
operation which is performed without due care
and humanity,
8 such person shall be guilty of an offence of cruelty within
the meaning of this Law, and sha1l be liable to imprisonment
for a  period not exceeding three months or to a  fýne not
exceeding twenty-fýve pounds, or to both such imprison-
ment and fýne :
Provided that where at the commencement of a  journey
an animal is physically fýt and in a  healthy condition and
a  person continues to over-drive or over-ride such animal
for the puýpose of completing the journey when he has no
reasonable opportunity of obtaining another animal for
the puýpose he sha1l not be deemed to ha\'e committed an
offence against this Law.
(2) For the puýposes of this section, an owner sha1l be
deelIÝed to have permitted cruelty within the meaning of
this Law if  he shall have fai1ed to exercise reasonable care
and supervision in respect of the protection of the animal
therefrom :
Provided that, where an owner is convicted of permitting
cruelty within the meaning of this Law by reason only of
his having failed to exercise such care and supervision,
he sha1l not be liable to imprisonment without the option
of a  fýne.,
a 4. Any person who shall unlawfully and maliciously Pen.aý.ty for
.kill, maim, wound or mutilate any animal shall be liable to :m~~o:~d
imprisonment for any term not exceeding six months, wounding.
5. (1) If any person shall, by committing any offence ~mpensa-
dth'
Ld..bdtýon for
un er ýs aw, cause any amage or ýn)ury to e one to damage
any animal or to any person or property he sha1l, on done by
conviction, pay to the owner of the animal (if the offender ~::~S~
is not the owner) or to the person who shall sustain damage
or injury as aforesaid, such sum of money by way of
compensation as the Court sha1l adjudge.

4 '., CAP. 47.] ~RUELTY TO A NI MA LS. O
(2) The payment of such compensation or imprisonment
,for the non"'payment thereof shall not prevent or in any
manner affect the punishment to which the offender may
be liable for or in respect of the ill-treating or mutilating
of the animal.
{3) Nothing herein contained shallprevent any proceeding
by action against the offender or his employer where the
amount of the damage or injury is notsought to be recovered
under this Law.
Goverý:ýor in 6. The Goveroor in Council may from time to time make 8
~~~~cýl may Regulations for the following purposes-
Regulations.
(a)  for ensuringfor animals carried bY sea or bYaif
3 of ý8/54.
a  proper supply of food and water and proper
ventilation during the passage and on landing ;
(b) for protecting animals from unnecessary suffering
during embarkation and disembarkation ;
(c) for securing a  proper supply of water and food to
animals during any detention thereof ;
(d) for the seizure, detention and disposal (including
slaughter) of stray dogs and cats and abandoned
or starved animals, and for the recovery from
the owners thereof of the expenses incurred in
connection therewith ;
(e) for the prevention of export of diseased or wounded
animals or animals suffering with broken or
dislocated limbs.
~~::~r~o 7. In any proceeding und.er this Law a  çou~t may, if  it  so
thýnks fýt, order that a portion of the fýne ýnflýcted upon the
accused, not exceeding one-half thereof, shall be paid to the
person, not being a police officer, who shall have given the
information which shall have led to the conviction.
Complaints 8. Every complaint under this Law shall be made within 8
~t~~~~~e one month af ter the cause of complaint arises.
montb.
Disposalof 9. Save in respect of such portions of fýnes recoveredunder
fines. this Law as may be awarded by the Court to persons under
the provisions of this Law, all such fýnes so recovered shall
be paid to the credit of the Committee of the Cyprus Branch
of t4e Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals and shall be expended by such Committee för the
purposes for which such Com;mittee is formed.

8 CRUELTY TO A NIMA LS. [CAP.47. 5 i
10. In any proceeding under this Law the Court may ~wer of
order any animal in respect of which such proceeding is de:Ýr~fh
taken- animal.
(a) to be destroyed by such person and in such manner
as the Court shal1 think fit, if the Court is of
opinion that the animal is  mortalIr injured or so
severely injured or so diseased or in such a
physical condition that it is cruel to keep it
alive;
8(b) to be detained for treatý:nent in such place and at
such cost for detentýon and treatment as the
Court may prescribe until it  shall have recovered
from its injury or ill-treatment.
11. If the owner of any animal ordered to be detained for Cost o~
treatment refuses or neglects to pay any cost in respect of ~~~:~~-
such detention and treatment prescribed by the Court in ment.
manner prescribed by the Court, the Court may order such
animal to be saId or destroyed. In the event of such animal
being saId, the proceeds of sale shal1 be applied in payment
of such cost as aforesaid; and the surplus, if any, of the
proceeds of sale shall, on the application of the owner
within two months of the time when the animal ceases
to be detained for treatment as aforesaid, be paid to him,
and if such application shal1 not be made it shall be
disposed of in such manner as th.e Court may direct.
12. if the owner of any animal shal1 be guilty of an cour:ý may
offence under ~ec~ion .3, the C?urt, up?n his conviction ~:~~~e
thereof, may, if ýt thýnks fit, ýn additýon to any other convicted of
pu~ishment, depriye such person of the own.ership of the ~r;:~~h~~
ammal and may make such order as to the disposal of the of animal.
animal as it  thinks fit in the circumstances : 4- of 18/54-
Provided that no order shall be made under this section,
.unless it is shown by evidence as to a  previous conviction,
or as to the character of the owner, or otherwise, that the
animal, if left with the owner, is likely to be exposed to
further cruelty.
c. .hý