

8 CAP. 49. i
~
TYPRUS
8
DISEASES OF PLANTS (PREVENTION)
CHAPTER 49 OF THE LAWS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959

-
I~
,
CHAPTER 49.
DISEASES OF PLANTS (PREVENTION).
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
.Section Page
1 Sh ort title 2
2 Interpretation 2
3 Declaration of infected areas o.. 000 ...2
84 Power of Governor to make orders 000 0.0 .00 2
5 Declaration of freedam !rom infection o.. 000 '0' 4
6 Power to enter upon lands and search for causes of disease o o o 4
7 Compensation for plants and vegetable products destroyed o o o 4
8 Power of Governor to prohibit importation of articles o o o o o o 4
9 Penalties lor contravention of order under preceding section ...5
10 Penalties for contravention of orders and obstruction of officers '0' 5
11 Reward to informer 00. 00' 5
To PREVENT THE INTRODUCTION AND SPREADING OF
DISEASE S OF TREES AND PLANTS.
1949Cap.80. [22ndjune, 1893.]
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Diseases of Plants
Prevention Law.
I~terpreta- 2. In this Law-
týon.
cc plant "  means and includes every tree, plant, herb
or grass of which the fruit or any other part is used for
the food of man or beast, or for any purpose in connec-
tion with arts or manufactures ;
cc plant disease "  means any deterioration or destruc-
tion of any plant or parts of apýant which is capable of
being communicated to any other plant or parts of a
plant, whether such deterioration or destruction is due
to disease, insects, blight, fungus or any other cause.
De~laration 3. The Governar shall have power from time to time, 8
~::;~cted when it shall seem to him to be necessary, to declare any
district or area within the Colony, or place within any such
area, to be a  place infected or suspected of being infected
witb apýant disease.
Power of 4. (1) The Governar may, from time to time, make any
:~~~~~e~~. generalar special orders for the following purpos~s or any of
them:
(a) for prescribing and regulatinJ;!. the destruction.

e Diseases of Plants (Prevention). [CAP.49. 3
remova!, uprooting, disposa! or treatment of
plants and products of a vegetable nature within
an infected district, area or place ;
(b) for prescribing and regulating the cleansing and
disinfecting of infected places and areas, or parts
thereof ;
(c) for prescribing the period within which it  shall not
be lawful to plant or re-plant with any plant
whatsoever, or with any particular kind of
8 plant, the whole or any portion of an infected
district, area or place ;
(d) for prohibiting or regulating the movement of
persons, animals, earth, soil, dung, vegetable
products or other things into or out of a district,
area or place declared to be a  place infected or
suspected of being infected with a plant disease;
(e) generally for the purpose of in any manýýer
preventing the introduction into the Colony
or the spreading therein of a  plant disease;
(f) for the appointment, payand regulation of the
duties of persons to be charged with the
execution of any provisions or orders made by
virtue of this Law.
And all such orders for the time being in force shall be
considered to be part of this Law.
(2) In the event of the failure or neglect of the owner of Power to
III.carry order
any trees or p ants on any area or p ace to comp y  wýth into effect.
any general or special order made by the Governor, the
,Director of Agriculture may by himself or by such offýcials
of the Agricultura! Department, as he shall by writing
under his hand authorize in that behalf do all such things
as may be necessary for carrying out the said order; and
-upon the Director of Agriculture certifying to the District
..Court the costs which have been properly incurred in
carrying out such order, such Court shall summon the
person on account of whose failure or neglect such costs
were incurred to appear before it  on a  certain day then and
there to make payment of the costs which shall appear to the
Court to have been properly incurred in that behalf; and
if such person shall refuse or fail to make such payment
forthwith, or within such time as the Court shall appoint,
the Court shall proceed to recover such payment in the
same manýýer as it  would proceed to recover any fiile incurred
under a sentence of the Court.

4 CAP. 49.] Diseases of Plants (Prevention). tO i
I?ecI~a- 5. The Governor may from time to time declare, subject .
:~~d~m to such conditions as he may think fit, any district, area or Iý
~ro
fm .place within any area, as being no longer suspected of being !
ýn ection. .
ft  d.th1d.
dhýn ec e wl a p  ant ýsease; an t  ereupon, save as
otherwise by such declaration provided, any general or
special order that may haye been made under the provisions
of this Law shall, so far as it  affects any such district, area,
or place, cease to have effect.
Power to 6. Any person authorized by the Governor may with or
8enter upon. .
Iands and Wlthout any ammals or beasts of burthen, carts, tools,
search for implements or other things enter upon any land and there
~~=:e~f examine any plants or products of a  vegetable nature, and
dig up the ground, and do all such other acts and things as
may be expedient in order the more effectually to search
for and destroy the causes of any plant disease.
<:ompensa- 7. When any plants or vegetable products shall have been
:~~:~nd destroyed under the authority of this Law, the
vegetabIe Commissioner of the District shall thereupon payout of the
~~~~~;ý:d. district treasury to the owner of the plants or products
compensation for such destruction, the compensation to be
assessed on the value of the plants or products at the time
of destruction by valuefs, one to be appointed by the
Commissioner and one by the Commissioner of the village for
that purpose. In the event of any disagreement as to the
compensation to be paid, the matter shall be referred to the
District Council (Mejlis Idare), whose decision shall be final :
Provided that if it is proved to the satisfaction of the
Governor that the destruction of any plants or vegetable
products was rendered advisable or necessary by the wilful
contravention by the owner of such plants or products of
the provisions of this Law, he may forbid the payment of
such compensation.
Power of 8. For the purpose of preventing the introduction into 8
~;::;rýr~it the Colony or the spreading therein of any plant disease, and
impo~ation for the purpose of making better provision for preventing the
of articles. importation of goods deemed likely to convey the germs of
any plant disease, and coming directly or originally from
countries or places believed to be infected with any plant
disease, the Governor may from time to time order that the
importation of any goods or articles be prohibited, or be
permitted only on such conditions as shall be determined
by any such order; and he may from time to time vary or
rescind any such order.

8 Diseases of Plants (P1'evention). [GAP. 49. 5 i
9. Any person who shall import or bring into the Colony Pe~es for .
any goods or articles or shall do any act or thing in con- ~o~ o;~~der
II
travention of any order made under the last preceding unde~.
section shall be liable to a fine not exceeding five pounds, ;:;i~;.ng
and all such goods or articles shall be forfeited together
with the packages containing the same and everything
packed therewith.
10. Any contravention of any order made under section 4, Penalties for
b tt"tffi"
t  d  tcontraven-8or any o  s mc ýan o  any o cer or person appoýn e o  tionoforders
execute any of the provisions of this Law, may be punished and.
by fine, not exceeding, for the first offence, one pound, and ~~~~~~n
for any subsequent offence, five pounds.
11. The Governor may order that the whole or any !'ýeward to
portion of any fine inflicted under this Law be paid to the ýnformer.
person by whose means the conviction has been obtained.
8