

i
~
CAP. 1. r
CYPRUS
8
.INTERPRET A TION
CHAPTER 1 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV, LONDON, W.1.
(Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.)
1959

INTERPRETATION. [CAP. 1. 1 i
--~
.
..-, -"
rCHAPTER ý.
INTERPRETATION.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
8 Section Page
1 Shorttitle 2
2 Interpretation of certain words andexpressions ..2
3 Laws to be public Laws , 8
4 Sections to be substantive enactments 8
5 Citation of Laws 8
6 Time when Law or public instrument comes into operation ..9
7 Commencement of legislation 9
8 Repeal of repealing enactment 9
9 Repeal and substitution 9
ýo Effec~ of repeal in future Laws 9
II Effect of repeal of Law on public instrumentand appointments ..ýo
L2 Construction of amending Law or regulations, etc., with amended Law
or regulations ýo
L3 Provision with respect to amended Law ýo
L4 Definitions in Law to apply subject to context and to public
madethereunder.. ýo
L5 Power in Governor to direct amended Laws to be printed as amended ..II
16 Assent not given ih same year as Law is passed II
17 Imperial A,?ts to be read with necessary modifications ..12
18 Appointment of officers by name or office 12
L9 Power to appoint includes power to remove, etc. 12
20 Powers of Governor where public öfficer is unable to perform fuÝ1ctions
of office 12
21 Power to make appointment to any office the substantive bolcler of
which is  on leavepending its relinquishment L3
22 Power of Governor to delegate authority 13
23 Delegation not to preclude e~ercise of powers by officer delegating same L3
24 Signification of Orders, etc., of the Governor in Council ..13
25 Signification of orders, etc., of the Governor L4
, 26 Construction of provisions as to exercise of powers and duties ..L4
827 Exercise 'Of statutory power between passing. and commencement of
Law 14
28 Extent of power to make public instrument 15
29 General provision with respect to power given to aÝ1y authorityto make
appointments and public instruments 15
30 Acts done under public instrument to be deemed done under Law by
which public instrument authorized L5
31 Computation of time 16
32 Tim~ , L6
33 Provisions when no time prescribed ..., L6
34 Measurement of distances : 16
35" Power of majority of moretha:n two persons 16
36 Deviations from forms L6
37 Provisions as to offences under two or more Laws... , .17
c. a

2 CAP.ý.ý. INTERPRETATION; i
rSection Page 3S Disposal and application of forfeits 17
39 Application of charges, fees and fines 17
40 Penalties prescribed to be ýnaxiýnuýn penalties 17
41 Stateýnent of penalty at foot of section ýs
42 Scgedule to forný part of Law ýs
43 Copies of Laws, etc., when to be prima facie evidence. ...ýs
44 Rights of the Crown ýs
A LAW TO CONSOLIDATE THE LAW RELATING TO THE 8
CONSTRUCTION OF LAWS AND TO MAKE BETTER
1949 Cap. 1. PROVISION FOR THE DEFINITION AND INTERPRETA-
30 of 53. TION OF CERTAlN WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS AND
19 of 54. MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO
30 of 54 .
42 of 55.
19 of 56. [20th September, 1935.J
Short title. ý. This Law may be cited as the Interpretation Law.
.
~fo~~freta- .2. In this Lawand in ever~ other Law, an~ in all public
certain ýnstruments, enacted, made, ýssued, kept or ýn use, before
words 3;nd or af ter the commencement of this Law, the following
expressýons.
dd.hallhh.hbwor s  an expressýons s ave t  e  meanýngs ere y
assigned to them respectively, unless there is something
in the subject or context inconsistent with such construc-
tion or unless it is therein otherwise expressly provided-
"  Accountant-General " means the Accountant-
General to the Government ;
"  act" used with reference to an offence or civil
wrong, includes a  series of acts, and words which refer
to acts done extend to illegal omissions ;
;50~~~/ii. "Administrative Secretary" means the Adminis-
614.' tive Secretary to the Government and includes the
Deputy Administrative Secretary ;
"  advocate "  means a  person enrolled as such under
8Cap.2. the Advocates Law, or any Law amending or sub-
stituted for the same, or any Law previously in force
in that behalf ;
"  Attorney-General" means the Attorney-General
for Cyprus ;
"Chapter," "Part," "section" and "Schedule"
denote respectively a  chapter, Part and section of and
Schedule to the Law in which the word accurs, and
"  subsection" denotes a subsection of the section in
which the word occurs ;

INTERPRETATION. [CAP.ý. 3 i
II Chief Constable ii  and II  Deputy Chief Constable 'i  56 Vol. II,
rmean respectively the Chief Constable and the Deputy 1249.
Chief Constable of the Cyprus Police F orce ;
II Chief Justice II and II Puisne Judge" means
respectively the Chief J ustice and a  Puisne J udge of
the Supreme Court ;
II Chief Registrar "  means the Chief Registrar of the
Supreme Court ;
8 II Chief Veterinary Offýcer i'  means the Chief Vet eri-
nary Offýcer to the Govemment;
II christian name ii  means any name prefýxed to the
sumame whether received in Christian baptism or
otherwise ;
II Colony i'  means the Colony of Cyprusý and includes
the territorial waters thereof, and all islands or islets
within such territorial waters;
tý commencement "  with its grammatical-variations
and cognate expressionsý when used with reference to
a Law means the day on which the Law comes into
operation;
II Commissioner 'i means the Commissioner of a
district and includes an Assistant Commissioner ;
II Commissioner of Labour ii  means the Comissioner 2(a) of
of Labour to the Government and includes the 30/53.
Assistant Commissioner of Labour;
II Compiröner 'i  means the Compirüner of Customs
and Excise to the Govemment;
II Court of Appeal ii  means the Supreme Court of
the Colony in its appenate capacity ;
II Cypriot ii means a person who i  being a former
:i8 Turk~s~ N atio.nalý has become or i~ entitled to become
;' a Bntýsh subject under and by výrtue of the Cyprus
(Annexation) Orders in Councilý 1914 to 1943, and
includes a  child of such person who is or is entiiled
to become a British subject and any descendant of
such child bom in the Colony ;
II Cyprus Police Force ii  means the Police Force of
the Colony constituted under the Law in force for the
time being ;
II days ii  means clear days ;
a (2)

.i
,i:' .: ';  .':: tt  Department ii  means a  Department of the Govem-
r.\,:,,::. ,. m~nt performing public duty by authority and on
behalf of Her Majesty ;
tt  Department of the Accountant-General ii means
the Department of the Accountant-General and Ýn-
cludes the Treasury of the Colony and the District
Treasuries ;
tt  Director of Agriculture ii means the Director of
Agriculture to the Govemment;
854 Vol. II, tt  Director of Audit ii  means the Director of Audit
604. to the Govemment;
tt  Director of Education ii means the Director of
Education to the Govemment;
~~ Vol. II, tt  Director of Lands and Surveys ii means the
.Director of Lands and Surveys to the Govemment;
54 Vol. II, tt  Director of Medical Services II  means the Director
604. .of Medical Services to the Govemment;
tt  Director of Public Works II means the Director
of Public Works to the Govemment;
.tt District ii  means an area declared to be a district
by any Law or proclaimed to be a district by the
'i Govemor under the authority of any Law in force for
the time beingý and includes a  sub-district ;
tt  District Court ii  means a  District Court constituted
under the Law in force for the time being ;
tt  District Inspector II means a District Inspector
serving Ýn the District AdminÝstration and includes
:. , an Assistant District Inspector ;
tt  donum ii or tt scala " means an area of one
':':' tl.ýo~sand and six hundred square yards according to
the British Imperial Standard; 8
2(a) of 30/53. tt Financial Secretary" means the Chief Financial
i Adviser to the Govemment;
tt financial year" means the twelve months ending
the thirty-first day of December in any year;
tt Gazette " meaIÝs the Cyprus Gazette published
by authority of the Govemment and includes :s1;1pple-
ments thereto and any extraordinary issue theroof so
published ; ,

INTERPRET ATION. ..' ' 1
.' '- ~
: tt gazetted "  means published in the Gazette; .
tt Government" means the Government of the -.co
rColöny ;
tt Government Analyst" means the Analyst to
the Government and includes any assistant or other
.c, analyst employed by the Government ;
~'C tt Government Bacteriologist "  means the Bacterio-
~ logist to the Government ;
,~ 8 tt Government Printer" means the Superintendent
::;, of the Government Printing Office and includes any
~ printer purporting to be the printer authorized to
...print Laws and other documents of the Government ;
tt Governor" means the Governor of the Colony
~a?d incl?des the .A~ting: Governor or the Officer for the
týme bemg admmýstenng the Govemment;
tt Governor in Council" or any cognate phrase
means the Governor acting with the advice of the
Executive Council of the Colony, but not necessarily
acting in such Council assembled, nor necessarily in
accordance with such advice ;
tt His Majesty "  or tt Her Majesty ," tt the King "  or
tt the Queen" or tl the Crown" means His Majesty
the King, or Her Majesty the Queen, Sovereign for
the time being of the United Kingdom and other Realms
and Territories of the Commonwealth, and includes
predecessors and the heirs and successors of such King
or Queen;
tt Imperial Parliament" or II ParÝiament " means
the Parliament of the United Kingdom ;
tt Law" means any enactment by the competent 2(a) of
legislative authority of the Colony but does not 30/53.
8 include an Act of Parliament extending expressly
or by implication or applied by a  Law to the Colony
nor atý Order of Her Majesty in Council, Royal Charter
or Royal Letters Patent;
lt the Law" when used in any public instrnment,
mea~s the Law under the authority of which such
public instrnment has been made ;
tt Law Officer" means the Attorney-General, the
Solicit<;>r-General or a  Crown Counsel ;
.--'..': .tt Loan Commissioners" means the .Board .of Com-

6 CAP. I.] INTERPRETATION. i
missioners constituted under the authority of the
rCap. 208. Public Loans Law; tt master," when used with reference to a vessel,
means any person (except a pilot or harbour master)
having for the time being control or charge of the
vessel ;
tt Medical Department " means the Medical Depart-
ment of the Colony ;
tt Medical Officer" means a medical practitioner in
the service of the Government ;  Ý-
tt month " mea,ns a calendar month ; .
,t Municipal Authority " means a Municipal Council
or a Municipal Commission or other body duly
authorized by law to exercise municipal authority and
government ;
tt oath" tt swear" and tt affidavit" ÝncIýýde and
,
apply to the affirmation or declaration of any person
.by law allowed to make an affirmation or declaration
in lieu of an oath ;
"order," tt regulations," "rules" and t, bye-Iaws "
mean respectively any order, regulations, rules and
bye-Iaws made in pursuance of powers conferred by
law'
,
tt Order in Council~' means an Order made in
pursuance of powers conferred by law on the Governor
in Council ;
tt peace officer" or tt police officer" means any
member of the Cyprus Police Force and includes every
other person lawfu1ly authorized to discharge police
duties ;
tt person" includes any company, partnership,
association, society i institution or body of persons,
corporate or unincorporate ;
t' Postmaster-General i' means the Postmaster- 8
General to the Government ;
tt pound" means pound sterling;
t, prescribed ii means prescribed by the Law in
which the word occurs or by any public instrument
made thereurider ;
,t public holiday i' means any day which under the
provisions of any Law for the time being in force is or
is declared to be or proclaimed as a public holiday;
t, public instrument i' means Ýiýy Order in Council,

/NTERPRET AT/ON. [CAP.l. 7 i
~
.'. order, proclamation, regulations, rules, bye-Iaws, -
notice, or register made, issued or kept under the
~authority of any Law;
II public notice "  means any announcement not of a
legislative nature which is  gazetted ;
II public officer "  includes every officer in the public
service of the Colony who is invested with powers or
performs duties of a  public nature, whether under the
immediate control of the Governor or not; .
8 II register" means any register kept or in use under
the authority of any Law or public instrument ;
II registered," when used with refereýýee or in relation
to any document, means registered under the pro-
visions of the Law for the time being applicable to the
registration of such document ;
II Rules of Court," when used in relation to any Court,
means rules made or issued by the authority having
for the time being power to -make or issue rules or
orders regulating the practice and procedure of such
Court ;
II rural constable" means a person appointed as
such under the Rural Constables Law, and includes a  Cap. 287.
temporary rural constable ;
II sale" and II seli" ÝncIlide exchange, barter and
offering or exposing for sale ;
II a  Secretary of State" means one of Her Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State ;
II the Secretary of State" means Her Majesty's
Secretary of State for the Colonies ;
II service by post "-where a  Law or public instru-
ment authorizes or requires any document to be served
by post, whether the expression II service," or the
expression II give "  or II send ," or any other expression
8 is used, then, unless a  contrary intention appears, the
service shali be deemed to be effected by properly
addressing, prepaying and posting aletter containing
the docume~t, and, unless the contrary is proved, ,to
have been effected at the time at which the letter
would be delivered in the ordinary course of post;
II sign," with its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions, with refereýýee to a  person who is unable
to write his name, includes the making of his mark;
II Solicitor-General "  means the Solicitor-General for
.Cyprus;

8 CA~~ 1.] INTERPRETATION. i
-.
,,:, ýý Supr~me Co~rt" means the Supreme Court of the
rCQý.o~y constit.~te~un4erthe Law in force for the time being ;
ýý territorialV:iaters" means any part of the open sea
within one marine league of the coast of the Colony,
measured from low water mark;
ýý United Kingdom" when used in this or any other
Law Or public instrument-
(a) enacted or made before the ýst October, 1921,
-means Great Britain and Ireland; 8
(b) enacted or made af ter the 1st October, 1921,
means Great Britain and Northem Ireland;
ýý vessel" includes any ship, boat, lighter or other
floating craft used for transport by water;
ýý Village Authority" or ýý Village Commission"
means the mukhta(and azas for the time being of any
town~ village or quarter of any town or yillage ;
.ýý will "includes codicil ;
where the words ýý or," ýý other" and ýý otherwise "
are used, they shall be construed disjunctively and not
as implying similarity, unless the word ýý similar" or
.c -' some :other word of like meaning is added ;
words importing the masculine gender ÝncIýýde
females;
words in the singular ÝncIýýde the plural, and words in
the plural ÝncIýýde the singular ;
ýý writing," and expressions referring to writing,
include printing, Iithography, type-writing, photo-
graphy, and other modes of representing or reproduc-
ing words in visible form ;
ýý year "  means a  calendar year.
Law~ to be 3. Every Law shall be a public Lawand shall be judicially
publýc Laws. noticed as such, unless the contrary is expressly provided 8
or declared by the Law.
Sections to 4. Every section of a Law shall have effect as a  sub-
~bstantive stantive enactment without introductory words.
enactments.
Citation of 5. When a  Law is  referred to, it  shall be suffýcient for all
Laws. purposes to cite the Law either by the short title, if any,
by whichit is made citable, or by the year of its passing and
its:number among the Laws of that year or in the case of
the revised edition of the Laws issued und~r an~ Law

INTERPRETATION. [GAP. 1. 9 i
.:
providing for the issue of a  revised edition, by its short -
title or its n~mber; and th~ reference may in aý.ý cases be
~made accordmg to the copýes of Laws purportýng to be
printed by the Governme~t Printer.
6. When an
yLaw or
Part of a Law or anyPublic Time when
-, , Law or
instrumeni made or issued thereunder is  expressed to come public
into.ope!ation on 8; pa:ticula: day, it  shall be.c°n.strued as ~~=~~:
comýng ýnto operatýon ýmmedýately on the expýratýon of the operation.
8 day next preceding such day.
7. Every Lawand any public instrumeni made or issued Com;neFce-
under any Law or other lawful authority and having :::~la~ion.
legislative effect shall be published in the Gazette and unless
it  be therein otherwise provided shall take effect and come
info operation on the date of such publication and shall
be judicially noticed. '
8. Where a  Law repea!s a  repea!ing enactment, it shall ~~~~~n~f
not be .construed as reviving any enactment previously enactment.
repealed, unless words are added reviving that enacimeni.
9. Where a  Law repea!s wholly or partially any former R~~1 ~~d
enactment and substitutes provisions for the enacimeni su s 1 u ýan.
-repealed, the repealed enactment shall remain in force until .
the substituted provisions come into operation.
10. (I) Where a Law repea!s and re-e~acts, with or ~~:1?~
without modifýçation, any provision of a former L~w, future Laws.
references in any other Law to the provision so repealed,
shall, unless the contrary intention appears, be construed
as references to the provision so re-enacted.
(2) Where a Law repea!s any other enactment, then,
unless the contrary intention appears, the repeal shall
not-
8(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time
.at which the repea! takes effect ;  or
(b) affect the previous operation of any enactment so
repea!ed or anything duly done or suffered
under any enactment so repealed; or
(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation, or liability
acquired, açcrued, or incurred under any enact-
ment so repealed; or
(d) affect any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment in-
curred in respect of any offence committed
,. -agaipst"any enactment so repealed-; or

ýo CAP.l.] INTERPRETATION. .i
(e) affect any investigation, legal proceedings, or -
rremedy in respect of any such right, privilege,
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment as aforesaid,
and any such investigation, legal proceedings, or remedy
may be instituted, continued, or enforted, and any such
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment may be imposed, as if
the repealing Law had not been passed.
:eff:~1~: 11. Whenever any Law has ~ready been ü.r shall here- 8
Lfw on af ter be repealed and other provýsýons are substýtuted by the
pub
t liCtrepealing Lawall public instruments, forms and appoint-
ýns rumen. .
and appoint- ments made or ýssued under the repealed Law, and ýn force
ments. at the time of such Tepeal, shall, until revoked or replaced,
continue good and valid in so far as theyare not inconsis-
tent with the substituted provisions.
c;onst~uc- .12. (1) Where one Law amends another Law, the
~~~:ding amending Law shall, so far as is consist.ent with the tenor
Law
ýaor. thereof, and unless the contrary intention appears, be
regu týons,
d.
hhddLetc., with construe as one wýt teamen e aw.
amended .
Lawor. (2) Where regulatýons, rules or bye-laws amend other
regulatýons. regulations, rules or bye-laws, the amending regulations,
rules and bye-laws shall, so far as is consistent with the
tenor thereof, and unless the contrary intention appears, be
construed as one with the amended regulations, rules and
bye-Iaws.
:~~i:~~:ect 13. WheneveT in any Law a reference is made to anot~er
to amended Law, such reference shall, unless the context otherwýse
Law. requires, be deerr:ed to include a reference to such last
mentioned Law as the same may from time to time be
amended, or to any Law substituted therefor.
pe~iti~ns 14. (1) Where terms are defýned in any Law, such terms 8
~~plyW o shall in the Law in which theyare derýned, lýave the mean-
subýec~ to d ings assigned to them by that Law, unless there is  anything
~~~~~li~n in the subject or context repugnant to or inconsistent with
.instruments such construction.
made there- .
under. (2) Where terms defýned in any Laware used in any
public instrument made or issued under such Law, such
terms shall have the respective meanings assigned ,to them
by the Law, unless theyare otherwise defýned in such
instrument or are inconsistent with the subject or context.

~ INTERPRETATION. [CAP.l. 11 i
~
15. (1) When by this or any Law, whenever passed, any ~werin t .
section or Schedule, or any word or words is, or are, directed dir:~;nor o
rto be inserted in, or omitted from, any previous Law, or ~endedb
any section or Sche~ule thereof, o; to be substituted for, or pri::e~oase
deemed to be substýtuted for, or ýnserted, or deemed to be amended.
inserted, in lieu of any section or Schedule, or any word or
words forming part, or the whole, of any section or Schedule
of any previous Law, then, in all copies of the Law so
amended and subsequently printed by authority, it shall
8be lawful for the Governor to order that the section or
Schedule or word or words shall be inserted or omitted in
accordance with such direction, and thereupon the amended
Law shall be printed accordingly with all necessary conse-
quential amendments of marginal notes, lreadings and
divisions and with references in the margin to the section
of the Law by which the amendment is made:
Provided that no amendment shall, by force of such
direction only, have any retrospective operation.
(2) WlÝenever the provisions of any Law which relate to
the practice or procedure of any Court have been, or shall
hereafter be; abrogated in pursuance of any rule-making
power in that behalf by law conferred, then, in all copies of
such Law printed by authority, it  shall be lawful for the
Governor to direct. that the provisions so abrogated shall
be omitted, and thereupon they shall be omitted and
reference made in the margin to the rules whereby such
abrogation was made.
(3) When any amended Law is reprinted under the
provisions of this section, unless the Secretary of State shall
otherwise order, the original number of the Law so reprinted
shall be retained, and if  any section, subsection or Schedule
or division of a Schedule has been repealed, the remaining
sections, subsections, Schedule or divisions of Schedules
A shall n?t be renumbered, a~~ .the fact that any section,
..subsectýon, Schedule or dýVlsýon of Schedule has been
repealed, shall be stated, and reference made in the mar-
ginal notes to the Law by which such repeal is effected.
16. Every Law shall be numbered, dated and cited as of ~ssen~ not
th.h.h..dgýven ýn e year m w ýc ýt ýs passe: same year
Provi~ed t~at; where t~e ass~nt to a Law is. not or cannot ~~r:; is
be obtamed m the year m whých the same ýs passed, and
such Law contains in its title or short title, if  any, the date
of such year, such Law shall be numbered, dated and cited
as of the year in which the assent shall be given, and shall

r2 ...CAP. f.} INTERPRETATION. i
be so read and construed, and in every copy or edition of .
the sai,d Law the said title and short title shalI be printed
~accordingly.
~~fse~~lbe 1 ': Whenever any Act of Parliament is exte.nded or
read with applýed to the Colony, such Act shall be read wýth such
:~~~~Z form al alterations as to ~ames, localities,. Courts, office~,
tions. persons, moneys, renaltýes, and otherwýse as may be
necessary to make the same applicable to the circumstances.
A
fPP
ffiointmebnt 18. Where by or under any Law, the Governor or any 8
o  o cers ybl'th"t.d.
name or pu ýc au on y ýs empowere to appoýnt or name a  person
office. to have and exercise any powers or perform any duties,
the Governor or such public authority may either appoint a
person by name or direct the person for the time being
holding the office designated by the Governor or by such
public authority to have and exercise such powers and
perforni such duties; and thereupon or from the date
.specifýed by the Governor or by such public authority the
person appointed by name or the person for the time being
holding the office aforesaid sha11 have and may exercise
such powers and perform such duties accordingly.
ýr /
;o~~:o 19. Where any Law confers upon any person or public
i!dudes authority power to make appoÝntments to any office or
/ power to place the power shall be construed as including the power
remove, etc. to determine any such appointment and to suspend any
person appointed, and to re-appoint or reinstate him, and
to appoint another person temporarily in the place of any
person so ,suspended, and to appoint another person to fýll
any vacancy in the office or place arising from any other
cause :  \\
Provided that where the power of the person or public
authority to make any such appointment is only exercisable
upon the recommendation or subject to the approval,
consent or concurren.ce <?f some other person or authority 8
the power of determInatýon or suspensýon shall, unless the
contrary intention appears, only be exercisable upon the
recommendation or subject to the approval, consent or
concurrence of that other person or authority.
~~~:;:o~f 20. Where the Governor is satisfýed that the holder of
where 1?ublic any public office is unable for any cause to perform the
~~b[eý:o functions of that office, it  sha11 be lawful for the Governor
perfo~m either to appoint another person to that office or to direct,
functýons .
tbttl. .dft"
hIIbefdbof office. a; ~ ýýe saý }lnc ýonþ s  a per orme y : a  _person
2 of 19/56.

'- INTERPRE'TA'rýO'}!~ {CA~'.-,ý..13 i
-' '-."'-"-_.'_' .
named by him or by the person for the time being hoýding, -
or lawfully performing the functions of, some other public
~office; and all the functions of the first mentioned office
s~all accordiý.ýgly -yesi (s~bject to any. conditions, ex~ep- -c,. ~
týons or. qualýficatýons whých the Governor may prescnbe)
in such person until his appointment or the direction, as
the cage may be, is terminated by the Governor. Power to
make
21. Notwithstanding anything in any other Law con- ~e~~~-any
8tained, when the substantive holder of any office constituted ~:~~:~t~ve
by or under any Law, in force for the time being, is on leave hol.der ,of
of absence pending relinquishment of his office, it shall be ~:ýceh ýs on
lawflil for another person to be appointed substantively to pe;din~ its
the same office relýnquýsh-
.ment.
3 of 30/53.
22. Where by any Law the Gov.emor is empowered to Power of
exercise any powers or perform any duties, he may, unless ~~ven;or to
by law expressly prohibited from so doing, deputeany a~t~:ri~y.
person by name or the person for the time being holding an
office designated by him to exercise such powers orperform
such duties on his behalf, subject to such conditions,
exceptions and qualifications as the Governor may pre-
scribe, and thereupon or from the-date specified by the
Governor the person so deputed shall have arýd exercise
such powers and perform such duties subject as aforesaid :
Provided that nothing herein contained shall authorize
the Governor to deplite any person to make roles, regula-
tions or orders under the poWer in that behalf conferred
upon birn by any Law.
23. Where by any Law the Governor or any public Delegation
officer is empowered to delegate the exercise of any öf the ~~:C~~de
powers or the performance of any of the duties vested in exercise of
him under such Law, no delegation made thereunder shall, ~~,;:~s by
8 tinless the contrary intentiolÝ appears, preclude the Gover- delegating
not or public officer, as the cage may be, from exercising or same.
performing in person at any time any of the powers or
duties so delegated.
24. Where any Law confers upon the Governor in Significa-
C.
1kbIi.tt.tcation of
ouncý power to ma.e any pu c  ýns rumen or appoýn -Orders, etc.,
ment,.give any directýons, issue any Order, aut~onze an.y ~~~or
thing or matter to be done, grant any exemptýon, remýt in Council.
aIÝy feeor penalty or exercise any other power, it  shall be 3 of 30/54.
suffýcient. if the exercise of such power by the Governor in
--

14 CAP. I.] INTERPRETATION. i
Council be signifýed under the hand of the Clerk of the
r-
.Executive Council.
S.ignifica- 25. Where any Law confers upon the Govemor power
týon of orders, etc., to make any public ýnstrument or appoýntment, gýve any
of the directions, issue any order, authorize any thing or matter
Governor.
bdtt..tflt3 if ý9/54 to e one, gran any exemp ýon, remý any ee or pena y
5 ~f 30/54: or exercise any other power, it shall be sufficient if the
exercise of such power by the Govemor be signifýed under
55, Vol. II, the hand of the Administrative Secretary, the Attomey- 8
6ý4. General or the Financial Secretary:
Provided that any warrant, proclamation, or other
instrument under the public seal of the Colony sha11 be
signed by the Govemor in person.
c;onstruc- 26. (1) Where any Law confers a power or imposes a
týon of
dhIh.tt.
thprovisions uty t   en, un ess t  e contrary ýn en ýon appears, e
as to. power may be exercised and the duty sha11 be performed
exercýse of. from time to time as occasion re
quires /./
powers .
and duties. .
d(2) Where any Law confers a  power or ýmposes a uty
on the holder of an office as such, then, unless the contrary
intention appears, the power may be exercised and the
duty shall be performed by the holder of the office for the
time being or by a  person duly appointed to act for him.
(3) Where any Law confers a power or imposes a  duty on
the holder of an office as such, then, unless the contrary
intention appears, the holder of such office, if he has
occasion to be temporarily absent therefrom, may, by
instrument in writing appoint the Deputy or Assistant of
such office to exercise such powers and perform such duties
and during the period of such temporary absence, as may
be specifýed in such instromeýýt.
Exercise of 27. Where any Law which is not to come into operation ..
~ý:~~~ory immediately on the passing thereof, confers power to rnake ...
bet,,:een any appointment or to make or issue any public instrument
~~:::n:~ or to give notice, or to do any other thing for the purposes
ment of of the Law, such power may, unless the contrary intention
Law. appears, be exercised at any time af ter the passing of the
Law so far as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose
of bringing the Law into operation at the date of the com-
mencement thereof subject to the restriction that any
appointment, public instromeýýt, notice or thing, made,
issued, given or done, under such power sha11 not, unless
the contrary intention appears in the Law, or the appoint-

INTERPRETATION.
ment, pubIic instrument, notice, or thing is necessary for
bringing the Law into operation, have any effect until the
Law comes into operation.
28. Wh~n powe~ is given t.o the Governor or to t~e E:~~tt~f
Governor ýn Councýl to make, ýssue or approve any public ~ake public
instrument, it  shal1 include the power of amending, revoking instrument.
or suspending such public instrument or withdrawing
approval thereof and of declaring the date of its coming
into force and the period of its operation and also of sub-
stituting another therefor.
29. Where any Law confers power on any authority to Gene.r~
k.
tk.
bIiprovýsýon
ma e any appoýn ment or to ma e or ýssue any pu c  with respect
instrument, the following provisions shall, unless the tc? power
contrary intention appears, have effect with reference to rnv;n to
the making, issue and operation of such instrument- authority
to make
(ar the instrumeni may be at any time amended, appoint-
varied, rescinded, or revoked by the same ::~J~ and
authority and in the same manner by and in instruments.
which it was made ;
(b) there may be provided for the breach of any Order
in Council, order, rules, regulations or bye-Iaws
such penalty not exceeding ten polinds, as the
authority making the Order in Council, order,
rules, regulations or bye-Iaws may think fýt ;
(c) where any Law confers power on any authority to
make any Order in Council, order, rules, regula-
tions or bye-Iaws for any general purposes, and
also for any special purposes incidental thereto,
the enlimeration of the special purposes shall
not be deemed to derogate from the generality
of the powers conferred with reference to the
8 general purpose ;
(d) no Order in Council, order, rules, regulations or
bye-Iaws shal1 be inconsistent with the pro-
visions of any Law.
Acts done
under public
30. An act shal1 be deemed to be done under a Law or ~ns~ment
the authority thereof, or by virtue or in pursuance or d~eý:ed
execution of the powers conferred thereby if  it  is done under ~e ~nder
or by virtue of or in pursuance of any pubIic instrumeni w~h y
made or issued under any power contained in such Law. ,Public
ýnstrument
authorized.

l&~~P.l.] INTERPRETATION, i
~tfo~u- 31: L:n computing time for the purp?ses o~ any Law or
rof time. publýc ýnstrument unless the contrary mtentýon appears-
(a) a  period of days from thehappening of any event
or the doing of any act or thing shall be deemed
to be exclusive of the day in which the event
happens or the act or thing is done;
(b) if  the last day of the period is Sunday or a public
holiday (which days are in this section referred
to as cc excluded days ") the period shall include
8the next following day, not being an excluded
day;
(c) when any act or proceeding is directed or allowed
to bedone or taken ona certain day, then if  that
day happens to be an excluded day, the act or
proceeding shall be considered as done or taken
in due time if it is done or taken on the next
day afterwards not being an excluded day;
.(d) when an açt or proceeding is directed or allowed
to be done or taken within any time not exceed-
ing six days, excluded days shal1 not be reckoned
in the computation of the time.
Time. 32. Whenever any expression of time occurs in any Law
or public instromeýýt, the time referred to shall, unless it  is
otherwise expressly proVided, be held to signify the standard
time adopted for the Colony,
Provisions 33, Where no time' is prescribed .or allowed within
~~enp~~. which anything shall be done, such thing shall be done with
scribed. al~ convenient speed, and as of ten as the prescribed occasion
anses.
Measure- 34. In the measurement of any distance for the purposes
:e~~tances. of any Law, or public instrument that distance shal1, A
unless the contrary intention appears, be measured in a .
straight line on a horizontal plane.
P°"Ye~ of
f35. Save as is otherwise expressly provided by any Law,
maJorýty o
hh' , .
dtbdbmore than W enever any art or t  mg ýs requýre o e one y  more
two persons. than two persons, a majority of them may do it.
Deviations 36, Save as is otherwise expressly provided, whenever
from forms.
f.
bdlihtd.t'thforms are prescn e, s  g evýa ýons ere rom, or
necessary alteratiofis thereto not affectiIig the substance or
calculated to mislead, shal1 not vitiate them.
"
"'

/NTERPRET AT/ON. [CAP. 1. 17 i
~
37. Where an act or omission constitutes an offence Provisions
das to -
un er two or more Laws, the offender shaU, unless the offences
~con~rary intentioý:ý appears, be liable to be prosecuted and ~:~~r~wo
punýshed under erther or any of those Laws, but shall not Laws.
be liable to be punished twice for the same offence.
38. (1) Where under any Law any money or any animal Disposa!
or any thing is  adjudged by any Court or other authority to :~~lication
be forfeited or is forfeited under any Law, it shall, unless of forfeits.
.-ý it is oth.erwise provided or unless it. is expressed by law to
.be forferted to any person, be forfeýted to the CroWll, and
the money or the net proceeds of the animal or tmýýg, if  it  is
ordered by competent authority to be sold, shall be paid
into the Department of the Accountant-General and shal1
form part of the revenue of the Colony, unless other
provision is  made.
(2) N othing in this section shall affect any provision in
any Law whereby any portion of any forfeit or of the
proceed3 of any forfeit is expressed to be recoverable by any
person or may be granted by ariy authority to any person.
39. (1) Where by or under any Law or public instrument ~pplica-
any p;erson is  required to :pay any charge or fee fo! any act ~:::r~;s. fees
or thing done,. or proceedmg taken or document ýssued, or and fines.
signature or seal affixed to any document, by any public
officer or Department, or where any person is adjudged by
any Court to pay any fme, such charge or fee and such fme
shall be paid into the Department of the Accountant-
General and form part of the revenue of the Colony unless
otherwise provided; and if any such charge, lee or fme or
if  any commission on money received or taken possession of,
realized, or otherwise dealt with, is required to be paid to
any public officer or Department, such officer or Depart-
ment receiving the same shall pay it  into or account for the
a. same in due course to the Department of the Accountant-
..General.
(2) Nothing in this section shall affect any provision in
any Law whereby any portion of any charge, fee or fine is
expressed to be recoverable by any person or may be granted
by any authority to any person.
40. Whenever in any Law or public instrement a penalty Penal~ies
..
b  dfff.h1bIiprescnbed
ýs prescn e or an o ence agamst suc aw or pu c  to be
instrement, the same shall indicate that such offence shall maxi~um
be punishable, upon conviction, by a  penalty not exceeding penalties.
c. b

~~ __~A!: 1 :!INTERPR~TA ,
(except as may be otherwise provided in the Law or public
rinstromeýýt) the penalty prescribed.
Stateme~t 41. WheneveT in any Law or public instrument a penalty
f~oýe~falty at is set out at the foot or end of any section the same shall
;;ection. indicate that any contravention of the section, role, regula-
tion or bye-Iaw, as the cage may be, whether by act or
omission shall be an offence against that Law or public
instrume~t and shall, unless the contrary intentian appears,
be punishable by a penalty not exceeding the penalty ..
stated. ..
fSchedule to 42. Every Schedule to any Law shall, together with any
orm part
fhof Law. note thereto, be construed and have effect as part o t   e
Law.
~pies of 43. The production of a  copy of any Law, public instru-
wh:'t~t~~ ment, public notice, Order of Her Majesty in Council,
pr~mafacie Charter, Commissian, Royal Warrant, Treaty, Letters
evýdence. .
Pd.
4  of 30/53. atent an appomtment-
(a) contained in any printed collection of Laws pur-
porting to be printed and published by authority;
or
(b) contained in any issue of the Gazette; or
(c) purporting to be printed by the Government Printer, ",
shall be prima facie evidence, in all Courts and for
all purposes whatsoever, for the due making or issuing and
tenor thereof.
:ýÝg~s of 44. No Law or public instrument shall in any manýýer
e  rown. whatsoever affect the rights of the Crown unless it  is tlierein
expressly provided or unless it appears by necessary
implication that the Crown is  bound thereby.
8