

e CAP. 2..
CYPIUS
8
ADVOCA rES
CHAPTER 2. OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTRD BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
[A ppointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonia/ Statutes) Aa, 1907.]
1959

8 ADV~CATES. [GAP. 2. -1
CHAPTER 2.
ADVOCA TES.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
8PART I.
PRELIMINARY.
SectioK Page
1 Short title 2
2 Interpretation '. 2
PART II.
ADMISSION AND ENROLMENT.
3 Admission of advocates 2
4 Documents to be produced for the inspection of the Chief Justice ..3
5 Enrolment of advocates 3
PART III.
PRACTICE.
6 Qqeen's Counsel 3
7 Conditions of practice 4
8 Judicial officers prohibited from practising af ter retirement ..5
9 Table of fees and Rules of Court to be exhibited 5
10 Liability to pay costs 5
PART ýv.
DISCIPLINE.
11 Advocates deemed to be officers of the Court 5
12 Disciplinary Board 6
13 Disciplinary offences and proceedings 6
PART V.
LOCAL BARS, COMMITTEES, BAR ASSOCIATION AND BAR COUNCIL.
14 Intrepretation 7
15 Ordinary general meeting of Local Bars 8
16 Extraordinary general meeting of Local Bars 9
17 Ordinary general meeting of the Bar Association 9
18 Extraordinary general meeting of the Bar Association ..10
19 Bar Council. 11
20 Powers of the Bar cOuncil. 11
21 Sub-committees 12
8 PART vý.
PENSIONS AND ALLOW ANCES.
22 R\lles to provide for pensions and allowances 13
23 Regulations of the Governor in Council to provide for dues ..14
24 Payment of dues into the Fund 15
25 Restrictions on advocates to charge clients for contributions or dues ..15
PART výý.
MISCELLANEOUS.
26 Parties to proceedings 15
27 Filling of vacancies 15
28 Power to make Rules 16
29 Saving.. 16
30 Date of coming into operation of the Law 16
b (2)

2 GAP.. 2~] ADYOCATES; tO
A LAW TO CONSOLIDATE AND A)lEND THE LAW RELATING TO
ADVOCATES AND TO )ýAKE PROVISION FOR THE ESTAB-
LISHMENT OF AN ADVOCATES' PENSION FUND.
58 of 55.
24 of 56. (6thSeptember,1955.]
PART I.
PRELIMINARY.
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Advocates Law.
~~ý:~tion. 2.-(1). In this Law, unless the context otherwise
8req uýres-
"advocate" means a person enrolled as such under
this Law or any Law previously in force in that
behalf;
"Bar Council" means the central council of the Bar
Association constituted under section 19;
"Disciplinary Board" means the DiscipIinary Board
estabIished under section 12;
"Local Bar Committee" means a local bar committee
elected under the provisions of subsection (3) of
section 15;
"practising advocate" means an advocate who is
entitled to practise under the provisions of subsection (1)
of section 7 and who, having as a  principal profession
that of a practising advocate, holds himself out as
ready so to do, and includes a Law Officer who is an
advocate;
"practising as an advocate" means-
(a) appearing before any Court or any judge
thereof or Court officer to take or conduct
any proceedings on behalf of any person or
the Crown;
(b) preparing or perusing for reward any
document intended to be used in connection
8with any proceedings before any Court.
(2) For the purposes of the defýnition "practising as an
advocate", "Court" means a Court established under any
Law, in force for the time being.
PART II.
ADMISSION AND ENROLMENT.
Admission 3. The Chief justice may approve and admit to practise
of advocates. as an advocate-
(a) anyperson who is  entitled to practise as a barrister-

r
iÝe AD~OCATES. [CAP. 2. 3
at-law in England or N orthem Ireland or as: an
advocate in Scotland or who immediately prior
to the fýrst day of October, 1921, was a member of
..the Bar of Ireland and who satisfýes the Chief
Justice that he is a  person of good character;
(b) any person who has been admitted to practise as a
solicitor in England or N orthem Ireland or as a
law agent in Scotland or who immediately prior
to thefýrst day of October, 1921, was a solicitor of
8the Supreme Court of Judicature in Ireland and
who satisfýes theChief Justice that he is a person
of good character and is not by reason of pro- "
fessional misconduct incapacitated from so
practising.
4. Any pers?n who desires to be en~olled a.s an advocate Po°:ments
sha11 produce ýn the office of the Chýef Regýstrar, for the produced
inspection of the Chief J ustice, his certifýcate of call to the ~or th~.'
Bar or of his admission as a solicitor or law agent or a ~~f~~ ton
certifýed copy thereof, and shall file in the office of the Chief rhi~
Registrar an affidavit of identity in such form as may be us ce.
approved by the Chief Justice:
Provided that the Chief Justice may, on specia! grounds
and upon such terms as he may think fýt, exempt any such
person from complying with any of the forma!ities prescribed
by this section either absolutely or for any specifýed period.
5.-(1) Any person approved and admitted to practise as ~nr~lment
an advocate sha11, upon the direction of the Chief Justice °  a vocates.
and upon payment of a  fee of ten polinds, have his name
enrolled in a  book to be kept by the Chief Registrar and to
be called tt  the Roll of Advocates".
(2) The Chief Registrar shal1, on the application of any
person whose name appears on the Ron of Advocates, issue
8to him a  certifýcate of enrolment under the seal of the Sup-
reme Court.
PART III.
PRACTICE.
6. No advocate who has the rank of a  Queen's Counsel Queen's
shall perform any of the functions which, in England, are Counsel.
performed by a solicitor and are not performed by a -, ;;,
barrister; but an advocate who has the rank of Queen's
Counsel shal1 not be precluded from continuing or engaging
'"
,cc

4 CAP.2.] ADVOCATES. '" "9
in partnership with another advocate by reason only that
such last-mentioned advocate performg any functions as
aforesaid.
C
fonditit~ns 7.-(1) No person shall
Practise as an advocate unless-
o prac ýce.
(a) he is enrolled as such under this Law or under any
other Law previously in force; and
(b) he shall have taken out an annual licence in such
form as the Chief justice may from time to time
prescribe (hereinafter called the "annual
8licence") :
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall apply to-
(a) any Law Officer;
(b) any officer of the Government authorized by the
Attorney-General to appear, plead and act in any
proceedings to which the Crown, the Government
or any officer of the Government in his official
capacity is  a party.
(2) An annual !icence shall expire on the thirty-first day
of December next following tlie date of issue and a  fee of
three pounds shall be payable in respect thereof to the Chief
Registrar, and any fees so paid shall be expended for the
formation or expansion of law !ibraries for the use of ad-
vocates in the variolis districts in such proportion as to the
Chief justice may seem fit:
Provided that no such fee shall be payable by any
advocate until his name shall have been on the Roll of
Advocates for a period of two years.
(3) Any person who practises as an advocate without
being enrolled or without being the holder ~f an annual
!icence in force at the time shall-
(a) be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to im-
prisonment not exceeding three months or to a
8fine not exceeding fifty pounds or to both such
imprisonment and fine;
(b) be incapable of maintaining any action for the
recovery of any fee, reward, costs or disburse-
ment on account of or in relation to any act or
proceedings done or taken by him in such
capacity;
(c) refund any such fee, reward, costs or disbursement
collected by hiJIl to the person from whom he has
so collected.
~~-

a ADYOCATES. [CAP. 2. 5
..
(4) No prosecution sha1l be brought under this section
without the consent of the Attorney-General.
8. (1) Without the prior consent of the Secretary of J~dicial
State, no person shall be enrolled as an advocate or sha1l ~ro~~~ted
practise as an advocate who, having been permanently from. .
appointed to a  judicial office af ter the 18th day of November, ~~:e~tisýng
1948, leaves the public service of Cyprus from such office; retirement.
and no annuallicence shall be issued to any such person.
8(2) For the purposes of this section-
ýý judicial office "  means the office of the Chief Justice
or of a J udge of the Supreme Court.
9. Every advocate shall exhibit in a  conspicuous place in jable oJ
his office such tables of fees or Rules of Court as the Chief ~~~e~~f
Justice may direct to be exhibited. Court to be
exhibited.
10. (1) Where a  party represented by an advocate in any Liabillty to
proceedings before a  Court is ordered to pay the costs thereof pay costs.
.
but fai1s to do so, the Court may order the advocate of such
party to pay the costs or make such other order as the justice
of the cage may require in either of the following cases:-
(a) where it appears to the Court that the proceedings
have been begun or carried on maliciously or
without reasonable or probable grounds; or
(b) where it appears to the Court that the advocate has
by any sort of deceit induced his client to enter
into or continue the proceedings: .
Provided that, before any order is made under this section,
the advocatesha1l be ca1led upon by the Court to show cause
why s1.ý{)h order should not be made.
(2) Any order made under this section by~a Court other
than a Court constituted by one or more Judges of the
Supreme Court shall be subject to review by the Chief
Justice, whose decision thereon shall be final.
8 (3) This section shall not be construed so as to restrict
the liability of any advocate in respect of the above-
mentioned or any other misconduct for which he would
~therwise be punishable. \
PART LV.
DISCIPLINE.
11. Every advocate sha1l be deemed to be an officer of the Advocates
Supreine Court and sha1l be liableto disciplinary proceedings ~e~~e:~
as in this Part provided. of the Court.

~ CAP. 2.] ADYOCATES. O
~Ýs::a~ 12. (1) The~e sha1l be esta.b~shed a  ~isciplinary Board
to exercýse, subject to the provýsýons of this Law, control and
discipIinary jurisdiction over every advocate.
(2) The DiscipIinary Board shall consist of the Attorney-
General, or in his absence or incapacity of the SoIicitor-
General, as Chairman, the Chairman of the Bar Council, as
ex officio member, and three advocates, out of whom two
sha1l have not less than fifteen years practice, elected every
three years by an ordinary general m~etipg of the Bar
Association, to hold office, until anather election takes place, 8
as elected members:
Provided that any elected member whose period of office
has expired shall continue to hold office for the purpose of
completing any enquiry commenced at the time he was a
member:
Provided further that in cage of absence or incapacity of
the Attorney-General or the SoIicitor-General, the Chairman
of the Bar Association sha1l act as Chairman of the Board~
~~~~~~n~ 13. (1) if any advocate is  convicted by any Court of any
proceedings. offence which, in the opiniQn of the DiscipIinary Board,
involves moral turpitude or if such advocate is, in the apiýýion
of the Disciplinary Board, guilty of disgraceful, fraudulent or
, unprofessional conduct, the DiscipIinary Board may-
(a) order the name of the advocate to be struck off the
Roll of Advoca tes ;
(b) suspend the advocatefrom practising for such period
as the DiscipIinary Board may think fit;
(c) order the advocate to pay, by way of line, any sum
not exceeding five hundred pounds;
(d) warn or reprimand the advocate;
(e) make such order as to the payment of the costs of
the proceedings before the DiscipIinary Board as
the DiscipIinary Board may think fit. 8
(2) Proceedings to enforce any of the penalties provided
by subsection (1) may be commenced-
(a) by the DiscipIinary Board of its own motion;
(b) by the Attorney-General;
(c) on areport made to the DiscipIinary Board by any
Court or a  Chairman of a Local Bar Committee;
(d) by an appIication, with the leave of the DiscipIinary
Board, of any person aggrieved by the conduct of
the advocate.
-

8 .ADYOCATES. [CAP.2.7
(3) The DiscipIinary Board shall forthwith send to the
Chief Registrar-
(a) copy of any complaint or report made against an
advocate under subsection (2); )
(b) copy of its decision in the enquiry, 1
and the Chief Registrar shall, subject to any order of the
Supreme Court under subsection (4) or (5), make the
necessary entries in the Roll of Advocates.
(4) if no copy of the decision of the Disciplinary Board has
8 been received by the Chief Registrar .after the expirat.Ý°n of
three months from the date on whých any complaýnt or
report has been made to the Disciplinary Board, the
Supreme Court may make any order in the matter of such
complaint or report as the DiscipIinary Board might have
made under the provisions of subsection (1).
{5) The Supreme Court may, of its own motion or on the
application of the complainant or of the advocate whose
conduct is the subject of the enquiry, review the whole cage
and either confýrýn the decision of the Disciplinary Board or
set it  aside or make such other order as it  may deem fýt.
(6) The Disciplinary Board may, if it thinks fýt, at any
.time af ter the expiration of fýve years from the date of an
order striking the name of an advocate off the Roll of
Advocates, inforýn the Chief Registrar that in the opinion of
the DiscipIinary Board the name of such advocate should be
restored to the Roll; the Chief Registrar shall refer the
matter to the Chief justice who may direct that the name
of such advocate be replaced on the Roll.. The Chief
Registrar shall forthwith cause a  notice of the directian of
the Chief j ustice to be pubIished in the Gazette.
(7) The Disciplinary Board in carrying out an enquiry
under this section shall have the same powers and shall
conduct the enquiry as nearly as may be as a Court of
summary jurisdiction.
8 (8) Any decision of the DiscipIinary Board shall be
deemed to be an order of a  Court of summary jurisdiction
and shallbe enforced in the same manýýer as an order of such
Court is  enforced.
PART V.
LOCAL BARS, COMMITTEES, BAR ASSOCIATION AND.
BAR COUNCIL.
14. (1) In this Part- Inter-
tt Bar Association" includes all the practising ad- pretation.
vcicates öf:theColöny;. ~- -, :,':' ,:-

8 CAP.2.]ADVOCATES. '9
"  Local Bar "  includes all the practising advocates in
a district.
(2) For the purposes of this Part an advocate shall be
deemed to be practising in a  district if  he or any advocate
with whom he is associated in partnership practises and
maintaing an office in such district.
Ordinary 15. (1) Af ter the expiration of one month and not later
~:e~~g of than three months from the coming into operation of this
Local Bars. L~w as regards the year 1955 and as regards each ensuing
8thýrd year, on or af ter the 10th dayand not later than the
31st day of january in each subsequent third year the
senior member of the Local Bar for the year 1955 and the
Chairman of the Local Bar Committee for each ensuing
period of three years shall summon all members of
such Bar to an ordinary general meeting at a time and place
to be fýxed by him.
(2) At such meeting the senior member in precedence of
the Local Bar present shall preside and a  quorum shall be
the number nearest to one-quarter of the members sum-
moned.
(3) The meeting shall proceed to the election from among
the members of the Local Bar of a Chairman and four
members to form the Local Bar Committee, which shall be
the' Local Bar Committee and shall hold office until the next
election of the Local Bar Committee.
(4) The Local Bar Committee shall appoint amongst its
members its Secretary.
(5) Af ter the election of the Local Bar Committee the
meeting shall proceed to elect from among the members of
the Local Bar but not necessarily from among the members
of the Local Bar Committee two practising advocates, one of
whom sha1l have at least fýfteen yearspractice, to represent
the Local Bar on the Bar Council until the next elect_ion. .8
(6) The Attorney-General and the Chief Registrar shall be
informed by the Chairman of the Local Bar of the persons so
elected and appointed.
2 of 24/56. (7) Three members of the Local Bar Committee shall
constitute a  quorum and questions arising at any meeting
of the Committee shall be decided by a majority of votes and
in cage of an equality of them the Chairman of the meeting
sh~llhave a second or casting vote.
2 of 24/56. (8) Subject to the provisions of this section and of para-

r.c,"'j;jC:"
e ADYOCATES. [CAP. 2. 9
graph (h) of subsection (1) of section 20, a Loca! Bar Com-
mittee may regulate its own functions and procedure,
including the manner in which elections under subsection
.(3) may be conducted, and may levy, on the advocates
practising in the district of which it  is the Local Bar Com-
mittee, an annual subscription not exceeding the sum of
three pounds.
(9) Every Loca! Bar Committee shall contribute each 20127/56,
year to the Bar Councilone pound in respect of every
8 advocate who has paid a  subscription under subsection (8).
(10) Any subscription payable under subsection (8) may 20127/56.
be sued for and recovered as a  debt due to the Local Bar
Committee, and without prejudice to his liability to pay
such subscription no advocate shall be admitted to any
meeting held under the provisions of this Law, or shall be
eligible for election to any Committee, Council or other body
under this Law, unless he has fýrst paid the subscription
payable by him under this Law.
16. (1) A Local Bar Committee may, and upon the EX
dt;ra-
t...fIfhfhorýnary
reques ýn wntýng o at east one- ourt o t   e total number general
of the members of such Bar shall, summon an extraordinary ~t~n! of
general meeting of the Local Bar to discuss and decide on a arg.
any subject included in the summons.
(2) The provisions of subsection (2) of section 15 with
regard to quorum shall apply to any such meeting, and all
questions shall be decided by a  majority of the votes of the
advocates present and in the event of an equality of votes
the president of the meeting shall have a  casting vote.
17. (1) The Attorney-General or in his absence or in- ~rdin~ry
capacity the Solicitor-General shall, not later than four :ý:e~~g
months af ter the coming into operation of this Law as ~f the. ~~r
regards the year 1955 and in each third ensuing year not ssocýa ýon.
8later than the 28th day of February, summon an ordinary
general meeting of all advocates practising in the Colony to
take place at Nicosia at a place and on a  day to be fýxed by
the Attorney-General, or in his absence or incapacity by the
Solicitor-General, but in any event not later than fourteen
days from the day of the summons.
(2) Not less than eight days' notice of such meeting shall
be given to all persons -entitled to attend and vote at such
meeting. Such notice shall specify the place and the time of
the meeting:
Provided that the accidental omission to give notice of "~

ýo CAP.2.] ADVOCATES. 9
meeting to or the non receipt of such notice by any member
shall not invalidate the proceedings of such meeting.
(3) The Attorney-General, or in his absence or incapacity
the Solicitor-General, and if theyare both absent or incapaci-
tated at the time appointed for holding the meeting, the
Chairman of the Bar Council shall preside at such meeti~g
and twenty practising advocates personally present shall
form a quorum.
(4) All questions shall be decided by a  majority of the
8votes of the advocates present and, in the event of an
equality of Yotes, the Attorney-GeneraJ, or in his absence or
incapacity the Solicitor-General, or in the absence or ih-
capacity of both, the Chairman of the Bar Council shall have
a casting vote:
Provided that if within half an hour from the time
appointed a quorum shall not be present the meeting shall
stand adjourned to the same day in the next week and at
the same time and place when ten advocates who are present
shall constitute a quorum.
(5) The ordinary general meeting of the Bar Association
shall proceed, amongst other things, to the election of three
practising advocates, out of whom the two shall have at
least fifteen years practice, to be members of the central
council of the Bar Association (to be known as the Bar
Council) and of three practising advocates out of whom two
shall have not less than fifteen years practice to be, members
of the Disciplinary Board to hold office until another election
.takes place.
E~ra- 18. (l) The Bar Council may, whenever it  thinks fit, and
~~ne~:7 it  shall upon a request made in writing to the Secretary by
~ee~g of not less than twenty practising advocates deposited at the
~S~i:tion. office, summon an extraordinary general meeting of the Bar.
(2) If  the Bar Council does not within forty days af ter the 8
deposit of such request proceed duly to convene such
meeting, any fifteen practising advocates of those making the
request may themselves convene an extraordinary general
meeting.
(3) The request shall state the object of the meeting and
shall be signed by those making it.
(4) The provisions of subsections (3) and (4) of sectioa l7
shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to any general meeting con-
vened under;this section ~

e ADVOC~TES: [CAP. 2. 11
Provided that if  within a quarter of anhour from the time
appointed no quorum is preseni, the meeting sha1l be dis-
&olved.
19. (1) The Bar Council sha1l consist of- Bar Council.
(a) the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General as
ex officio members who sha1l be also the President
and Vice-President thereof, respectively;
(b) the two practising advocates elected to representa. 
each Local Bar under the provisions of sub-
.section (S) of section ýs and the three members
elected by the ordinary general meeting of the
Bar Association under the provisions of sub-
section (S) of section 17 (in this Law referred to
as tt the elected members ").
(2) The elected members of the Bar Council shall hold
office until the next election and the elected members shall
be eligible for re-elect'ion.
(3) The Bar Council sha1l elect amongst its members its
own Chairman and Secretary.
(4) The Bar Council may hold, adjourn or otherwise
regulate its meetings as it may think fýt.
(S) Five members of the Council sha1l constitute a quorum
and questions arising thereat sha1l be decided by a  majority
of votes and in case of an equality of them the chaiTman of
the meeting shaU have a second or casting vote.
(6) The Chairman of the Bar Council shall, in the absence
or incapacity of the Attorney-General or Solicitor-General
preside at all meetings of the Bar Council at which he shall
be preseni bui if  he is abseni then the members preseni sha1l
choose one of their number to preside.
(7) The Chairman of the Bar Council may convene all the
8meetings of the Bar Council and shall do so when requested
by the Attorney-General, or in his absence or incapacity .
the Solicitor-General, or at least fýve members of the Council
by a  written request specifying the objects of such meeting.
20. (1) The Bar Council sha1l consider all matters Powers of
fft.thf.dkho"h.the Bar a ec ýng e pro essýon an ta e  suc actýon t   ereon as ýt Council.
may deem expedient and, without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing provision or to any other powers conferred
upon it  by this Law, sha1l have the following powers:-
(a) to maintain the honour and independence of the

~: GAP. 2.] ADYOCATES. '9
Bar and its defence in relation to the judiciary
and the executive;
(b) to regulate the practice and etiquette of the pro-
fession;
(c) to answer questions' and give rulings affecting pro-
fessional etiquette and practice;
(d) to exarnine and, if it thinks fýt, to report upon
current legislation and any other lega! matters
submitted to it or to make recommendations to
8Government as to the desirability of introducing
any legislation;
(e) to represent the body of practising advocates in any
matter in which it may be necessary or ex-
pedient;
(f) to further good relatiöns and understanding between
the Bar and the public;
(g) to protect the public right of access to the Courts
and of representation by counsel before any
Court or tribunal;
(h) to prescribe the powers and functions of Loca! Bar
Committees additional to those conferred by this
Law;
(i) to make Rules regulating and prescribing any of the
above matters, subject to such Rules being
approved by the majority of a  general meeting
of the advocates.
(2) Any Rules made by the Bar Council under sub-
section (1) shall be published in the Gazette and thereupon
shall be binding on all practising advocates.
(3) Any advocate who contravenes or fails to observe
any Rules made under subsection (2) shall be deemed to be
guilty of unprofessional conduct and shall be liable to be
8dealt with for such conduct under the provisions of section
13.
.(4) The Bar Council may appear b~fore any Court by any
of its members or by any other practising advocate.
(5) The Bar Council may regulate its own functions,
practice and procedure in such manýýer as it  sha!l think fýt.
Sub- "tt 21. (1) The Bar Council shall, as soon as may be af ter
commý ees. its elettion, constitute the following sub-committees, in

18 ---ADVOtATES. [CAP. 2. 13
addition to any other sub-committees which may be con-
sidered desirable:-
(a) a Legislation Sub-committee which shall examine
and, if it thinks fýt, report upon current legis-
lation of the Colony and any other legal matter
submitted to it, and may make recommendations
for submission to Government as to the desira-
bility of introducing any legislation;
(b) a Practice and Etiquette Sub-committee to draft
8rules regulating the practice and etiquette of the
profession in the Colony and to co-ordinate and
advise upon matters of professional conduct;
(c) an Executive Sub-committee which sha11 be a
standing committee empowered to make and
execute decisions on behalf of the Bar Council
in matters which are considered by the Executive
Sub-committee to be too unimportant to require
reference to a  meeting of the Bar Council or
where it is considered by the Executive Sub-
committee that despatch is essential.
(2) Action taken by sub-committees shal1, at the fýrst
convenient opportunity, be submitted for approval by the
Bar Council.
PART VI.
PENSIONS AND ALLOWANCES.
22. (1) The Bar Council sha11, with the approval of the Rul~ to
Governor, make Rules under this Part, to be published in the ~~::~~sf~d
Gazette, to provide for the establishment of a  Fund to be al1owances.
ca11ed as the "Advocates' Pension Fun:d" (in this Law
referred to as "  the Fund ") for granting pensions and al1ow-
ances to retiring advocates contributing to the Fund (in this
Law referred to as "  the contributors ") and in cage of their
8 death to their widows and orphans.
(2) Any Rules made under this Part shal1 make provision
for-
(a) the constitution of a board of management (in this
Law referred to as "  the Board ") of the Fund
and for the regulation of the proceedings, inclu-
ding quorum, of the Board;
(b) the powers and duties of the Board;
(c) the investment of money belonging to the Fund, for
the periodical audit and valuation of the Fund,

14, CAP.2:] ADYOCATES. -O
and, whereany va1uation of the Fund shows that
it-
(i) is or is likely to become insufficient to
discharge its liabilities; or
(ii) is and is likely to continue to be more
than reasonably suffýcient to discharge its
liabilities,
for making such modifýcations of the Rnles as
, appear to be required in order to make the Fund
as the cage may be, sufficient, or no more than
8reasonably suffýcient, to discharge its liabilities;
(d) the payment of contributions to the Fund by
practising advocates and for the amount and
manýýer of collection of such contributions and
the sanctions for failure to pay such contri-
butions;
(e) the conditions Qf the grant of pensions and aýýow-
ances to contributors or their widows and
orphans and the manýýer of calculation of such
pensions and a1lowances;
(i) the information to be furnished by contributors and
their widows and orphans;
(g) prohibiting the assignment of, or any charge or
i excution on, a pension or gratuity;
(h) the circumstances under which a  pension granted
under these Rules shall cease or lapse;
(ý) the keeping of proper accounts of the Fund and the
manýýer of their audit;
(j) the conditions of, and the procedure to be followed
in cage of, dissolution of the Fund and for the
manýýer of disposal of the Fund in such case;
(k) such incidental and supplementary matters as may
be necessary or expedient for the purposes of the
Fund. 8
Regulations 23. (1) On the establishment of the Fund under sub-
~~~~or section (1) of section 22 the Governor in Council sha1l make
in C~uncil to Regulations to provide-
provýde for .
dues. (a) for the payment of such dues, as may be prescnbed,
by every practising advocate who appears before
any Court or judge or other officer of the Court,
or who is  doing any other act as an advocate as
may be prescribed, or who files with, or produces
before, any Court or judge or other officer of the

e ADVOCATES. [CAP. 2. 15
Court any prescribed document, or on whose
behalf any such document is so fýled or produced;
(b) for the manýýer of collection of such dues.
(2) N o  advocate shal1 be permitted to appear before any
Court or j udge or other offýcer of the Court or to do any
prescribed act and no prescribed document shal1 be fýled
with, or produced before, any Court or judge or other offýcer
of the Court unless the dues, prescribed under subsection
(1), are paid.
8 ~ 24. All moneys collected from dues imposed under sub- Paymen~
section (1) of section 23 shall be paid into the Fund but, ~~:~~ný:to
subject to that payýnent, no other payment shall be made
into the Fund from the general revenue of the Colony. '
25. (1) No advocate shal1 charge or collect from any of Restriction
h.
lit.d  bhibf.b.on advocates
ýs c en s  any amount paý y m y  way o contn utýon to charge
to the Fund or dues imposed under subsection (1) of section clients for
23 contributions
.or dues.
(2) Any advocate who acts in contravention of subsection
(1) shall be guilty of unprofessional conduct and shall be
liable to be proceeded against by discipIinary action under
thisLaw.
PART VII.
MýscELLANEOUS.
26. N otwithstanding anything in this Law contained any Partie~~o
party to any civil or criminal proceedings may appear in procee ýngs.
person and conduct his own case; and where there are
several parties to a civil proceeding having common interests,
any one of such parties may be authorized in writing by the
8other or others to appear on his or their behalf and conduct
the case; and the Court dealing with a civil proceeding may,
where it  shall so think proper, upon the personal application
of any party, al1ow any person who is a  near relative of such
party to appear on his behalf and to conduct his case for him.
27. if any vacancy occurs among the members of a  Local Filling .
BC.hIdbfhBof vacancýes.
ar ommýttee or among t e e ecte mem ers o t e ar 4 01 24{56.
Council, such vacancy shall be fýlled by the election of a
qualified member by the remaining members of the Local
Bar Committee or the Bar Council, as the cage may be, and
c. c

16 CAP.2.] ADVOCATES. O
any member so elected shall hold office for the remainder of
the term for which the previous member was elected:
Provided that if by reason of vacancies occurring among
the members of a Local Bar Committee or among the elected
members of the Bar Council, the number of such members
fal1s below one-third, then such vacancies shall be fýlled by
the election of new qualifýed members at a general meeting
of the Local Bar, or of the Bar Association, as the case may
be, held for the purpose.
P~er ~oý 28. The Governor, with the advice and assistance of the 8
m e u es. Chief justice, may make Rules, to be published in the
Gazette, for the better carrying into effect the purposes of
Parts II, III and ýv of this Law, and, without prejudice
to the generality of the powers hereinbefore conferred, for
prescribing the maximum fees which may be taken by
advocates in respect of any business transacted at the
District Lands Office.
i~~n~ 3 29. Any advocate enrolled under the Advocates Lawand
ap. .any annual licence granted thereunder shall be deemed to
have been enrolled or granted under this Law.
Dat«: of. 30. This Law shall come into operation on its publication
~~=Joý:~f in the Gazette* except Part vý which shall come into opera-
the Law. tion on a  date to be fýxed by the Governor by a  notice in
the Gazette.
.The date of publication was 8th September. 1955.
.