

"e"c~"~",c'",c"",
1",CCCc"c" " YC
CAP. 4. ~
.
~ r
CYPRUS
8
ARBITRA TION
CHAPTER 4 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
re
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.1.
.
[A ppointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statulesi Act. 1907.]
1959

ARBITRATI~N. [CAP. 4 1 i
CHAPTER 4. r
ARBITRATION.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title 1
2 Interpretation 1
8 3 Ar~~~::ion ~~eement irr~~.ocable havi~~ effect as ~ order of ~~ 2
4 Arbitration agreement not to be discharged by death of party thereto... 2
5 Provisions in case of bankruptcy 2
6 Provisions implied in arbitration agreements 3
7 Reference to official referee 3
8 Power to stay proceedings where there is an arbitration agreement ...3
9 Power of Court to give relief where arbitrator is not impartial or
dispute referred involves question of fraud 3
ýo Power of Court in certain cases to appoint an arbitrator, umpire or
third arbitrator 4
II Provisions on the appointment of two arbitrators 4
12 Provisions on the appointment of three arbitrators 5
13 Arbitrators and umpires to use due dispatch 5
14 Power of Court where arbitrator is removed or appointment of
arbitrator is revoked 6
15 Whenumpireisthesolearbitrator 6
16 Powers of arbitrator 7
17 Summoning of witnesses 7
18 Enlargement of time for making award ...J 7
19 Power to remit award 7
20 Power to set aside award 7
21 Enforcing award 7
22 Interest on awards 7
23 Provision as to costs 7
24 Limitation of time for commencing arbitration proceedings ...8
25 Fees and appointment of official referee 9
26 Additional powers of Court 9
27 Statement of case by arbitrator or umpire ýo
28 Costs ýo
29 Taxation of arbitrator's or umpire fees ýo
30 Rules of Court 11
31 Crown to be bound 11
32 Saving for pending arbitrations 11
33 Trade Disputes (Conciliation, Arbitration and Inquiry) Law, not
affected 12
FIRST SCHEDULE
8Provisions to be implied in arbitration agreements 12
SECOND SCHEDULE
Mattet8 in respect of which the Court may take orders ...13
A LAW TO MAKE PROVISION FOR THE REFERENCE AND
SUBMISSION OF DIFFERENCES TO ARBITRATION.
[6th january, 1944.] 1949 Gap. 5.
1. This Law may be cited as the Arbitration Law. Short title.
2. (1) In this Law- Interpreta-
tt  ~rbitration _'i}.greement "  means a  written agreement tion.

2- _CAP. 4]ARBITRATION. i
to submit present or future differences to arbitration,
r- whether an arbitrator is named therein or not;
cc the Court "  means the District Court or any judge
thereof having jurisdiction in the matter.
(2) References in this Law to an award shall ÝncIýýde refer-
ences to an interim award,
Arbitration
3Ab'tt'
nI.,
agreement ..n ar ý ra l?n agreeme~t, u ess a  contrary ýntentýon
irre,;,ocable ýs expressed thereýn, shall be ýrrevocable except by leave of 8
~~~re:;ct the Court and shall have the same effect in all respects as if
Tourto it  had been made an order of Court.
Arbitratiotn 4.
(1) An arbitration agreement shall not be discharged b
Yagreemen .
n?t to be the death of any party thereto, eýther as respects the
~lsc:ar
tghed f deceased or any other party, but shall in such an event be
y ea o
fblb.hdm.. party en orcea e y or agaýnst t  e  executor, a ýnýstrator or
thereto. heirs of the deceased as representing his estate.
(2) The authority of an arbitrator shall not be revoked by
the death of any party by whom he was appointed,
(3) Nothing in this section shall be taken to affect the
operation of any enactment or rule of law by virtue of which
any right of action is extinguished by the death of a person.
~rovisio~s 5. (1) Where it is provided by a  term in a contract to
~~~;tcy. which a bankrupt is a  party that any differences arising
thereout or in connection therewith shall be referred to
arbitration, the said term shall, iý the trustee in bank-
ruptcy adopts the contract, be enforceable by or against
him so far as relates to any such differences.
(2) Where a person who has been adjudged bankrupt had
before the commentement of the bankruptcy become a
party to an arbitration agreement and any matter to which 8
the agreement appIies requires to be determined in connec-
tion with or for the purposes of the bankruptcy proceedings,
then, if  the case is one to which subsection (1) of this section
do es not apply, any other party to the agreement or the
trustee in bankruptcy, may apply to the Court for an order
directing that the matter in question shall be referred to
arbitration in accordance with the agreement, and that
Court may, if  it  is of opinion that, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case, the matter ought to be determined
by arbitration, make an order accordingly.'"

ARBITRATION. [CAP. 4 3 i
6. An arbitration agreement, unless a contrary intention ~O~~O!1S -
ris expressed therein, shall be deemed to ÝncIlide the provi- ~ý:ý&;atiý:n
sions set out in the First Schedule to this Law, so far as they a~eements.
are applicable to the reference under the arbitration ~~~:dule.
agreement.
7. Where an arbitration agreement provides that a  Ref~rence to
reference shall be to an official referee, any official referee to ~r:Ý~.
whom application is made shall, subject to any order of
8 Court as to transfer or otherwise, hear and determine the
matters agreed to be referred.
8. If  any party to an arbitration agreement, or any person ~ower to
claiming through or under him, commences any legal ~r:eedings
proceedings in any Court against any other party to the ~here there
arbitration agreement or any person claiming through or ~r~~ration
under him, in respect of any matter agreed to be referred, agreement.
any party to such legal proceedings may at any time af ter
appearance, and before delivering any pleadings or taking
any other steps in the proceedings, apply to that Court to
stay the proceedings, and that Court, if  satisfýed that there
is no sufficient reason why the matter should not be referred
in accordance with the arbitration agreement and that
the applicant was, at the time when the proceedings were
commenced, and stili remains, ready and willing to do all
things necessary to the proper conduct ot the arbitration,
may make an order staying the proceedings.
9. (1) Where an agreement between any parties provides Power of
that disputes which may arise in the future between them ~~~~ei?ef
shall be referred to an arbitrator named or designated in the where
agreement and af ter a dispute has arisen any party applies, f:~:ator
on the ground that the arbitrator so named or designated i~partial or
is not or may not be impartial, for leave to revoke the arbi- :~~~~
-tration agreement or for an injunction to restrain any other invol,-:es
..party or the arbitrator from proceeding with the arbitration, ý~e:J~on of
it  shall not be a ground for refusing the application that the
said party at the time when he made the agreement knew,
or ought to have known, that the arbitrator by reason of
his relation towards any other pa,rty to the agreement or of
his connection with the subject refetred might not be capable
of impartiality.
(2) Where an agreement between any parties provides
that disputes which may arise in the future between them
shall be referred and a dispute which so arises involves the

4 CAP. 4] ARBITRATIONo i
question whether any such party has been guilty of fraud,
r-
the Court shall, so far as may be necessary to enable that
question to be determined by the Court, have power to
order that the agreeriýent shall cease to have effect and
power to give leave to revoke any arbitration agreement
made thereunder o
(3) In any cage where by virtue of this section the Court
has power to order that an arbitration agreement shall
cease to have effect or to give leave to revoke an arbitration
:8agreement, the Court may refuse to stay any action brought
in breach of the agreement.
Power,af ýo (1
)In any of the followin
g cases-
Court ýn ..
certai~ (a) where an arbitration agreement provides that the
~:~in~ an reference shall be to a single arbitrator, and all
arbit;ator, the parties do not af ter differences have arisen
umpýre or o
h.
fbO
third concur ýn t  e appoýntment o an ar ýtrator; or
arbitrator. (b) if an appointed arbitrator refuses to act, or is
incapable of acting or dies, and the arbitration
agreement does not show that it  was intended
that the vacancy should not be supplied, and
the parties do not supply the vacancy; or
(c) where the parties or two arbitrators are at liberty
to appoint an umpire or third arbitratÇ>r, or
where two arbitrators are required to appoint
an umpire, and do not appoint him; or
(d) where an appointed umpire or third arbitrator
refuses to act, or is incapable of acting or dies,
and the arbitration agreement does not show
that it was intended that the vacancy should
not be supplied, and the parties or arbitrators
do not supply the vacancy,
any party may serve the other parties or the arbitrators,
as the case may be, with a  written notice to appoint an -
arbitrator, umpire or third arbitrator o .,
(2) If the appointment is not made within seven clear
days af ter the service of the notice, the Court may, on
application by the party who gaye the notice, appoint an
arbitrator, umpire or third arbitrator, who shall have the
like powers to act in the reference and make an award as if
he had been appointed by consent of all parties.
Provisions :
on th.e ll. Where an arbitration agreement provides that a
~fký:tment reference shall be to two arbitrators, one to be appointed by
arbitratorso
-

ARBITRATION. [CAP. 4 5 i
.
each party, then, unless the arbitfation agreement expresses
a  contrary intention- .
(a) if  either of the appointed arbitrators refuses to act,
or is  incapable of acting or dies, the party who~
appointed him may appoint a  new arbitrator in
his place; or
(b) if, on such a  reference, one party fails to appoint
an arbitfatür, either orginally or by way ot sub-
stitution as aforesaid, for seven clear days af ter
Ý- the other party, having appointed his arbitrator,
..has served the party making default with notice
to make the appointment, the party who has
appointed an arbitfatür may appoint that
arbitrator to act as sole arbitfatür in the
reference, and his award shall be binding on
both parties as if he had been appointed by
consent:
Provided that the Court may set aside any appointment
made in pursuance of this section.
12. (1) Where an arbitfation agreement provides that the Provisions
reference shall be to three arbitrators, one to be appointed ~~;~~tment
by each party and the third to be appointed by the two of t:ýýree
appointed by the parties, the agreement shall have effect arbýmtors.
as if  it  provided tor the appointment of an umpire, and not
for the appointment of a third arbitrator, by the two
arbitrators appointed by the parties.
(2) Where an arbitfation agreement provides that the
reference shall be to three arbitrators to be appointed other-
wise than as mentioned in subsection (1) of this section,
the award of any two of the arbitrators shall be binding.
13. (1) The Court may, on the application 'of any party Arbitrat~rs
fb..hfiltand umpýres
to a  re erence, remove an ar ýtrator or umpýre w o a s o  to use due
8use all reasonable dispatch in entering on and proceeding dispatch.
with the reference and making an award.
(2) An arbitrator or umpire who is removed by the Court
under this section shall not be entitled to receive any
remuneration in respect of his services.
(3) Subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of section 19
of this Lawand to anything to the contrary in the arbitra-
tion agreement, an arbitrator or umpire shall have power to
make an award at any time.
(4) For the purposes of this section, II proceeding with a

~ CAP. 4] ARBITRATION. i
reference" includes, in a case where two arbitrators are
runable to agree, 'giving notice of that fact to the parties and
to the umpire.
~~:~r :;'{ere 14. (1) Where an arbitrator (not being a  sole arbitrator),
arbitrator is or two or more arbitrators (not being all the arbitrators)
~~~~r:~~~t or an umpire who has not entered on the reference is or are
?f arbitrator removed by the Court, the Court may, on the application of
ýs revoked. any party to the arbitration agreement, appoint a person or
persons to act as arbitrator or arbitrators or umpire in place A.
of the person or persons so removed. ý-
L (2) Where the appointment of an arbitrator or arbitrators
r or umpire is revoked by leave of the Court, or a sole
arbitrator or all the arbitrators or an umpire who has
entered on the reference is or are removed by the Court,
the Court may, on the appIication of any party to the
arbitration agreement, either-
(a) appoint a person to act as sole arbitrator in place of
the person or persons removed; or
(b) order that the arbitration agreement shall cease
to have effect with respect to the dispute referred.
(3) A person appointed under this section by the Court
as an arbitrator or umpire shall have the like power to act
in the reference and to make an award as if he had been
appointed in accordance with the terms of the arbitration
agreement.
(4) Where it  is provided (whether by means of a provision
in the arbitration agreement or otherwise) that an award
under an arbitration agreement shall be a condition
precedent to the bringing of an action with respect to any
matter to which the agreement appIies, the Court, if it
orders (whether under this section or under any other
enactment) that the agreement shall cease to have effect
as regards any particular dispute, may further order
8that the prQvision making an award a  condition precedent
to the bringing of an action shall also cease to have effects
as regards that dispute.
Whe~ .15. At any time af ter the appointment of an umpire,
~~P~felS however appointed, the Court may, on the application of
arbitrator. any party to the reference and notwithstanding anything
to the contrary in the arbitration agreement, order that the
umpire shall enter on the reference in lieu of the arbitr~tors
and as if  he were a  sole arbitrator.

A RBITRA TION. .[CAP. 4: 7 i
~
16. The arbitrators or umpire acting under an arbitration P~'!:rrstOf :.
agreement shall, unless the arbitration agreement expresses ar ý a or.
ra  contrary intention, have power-
(a) to administer oaths to or take the affirmations of
the parties and witnesses appearing; and
(b) to correct in an award any clerical mistake or error
arising from any accidental slip or omission.
17. Any party to an arbitration agreement may apply to S;mý;xýoning
.ýA the Court for the issue of a summons requiring any person to o  wýtnesses.
'w' attend for examination or to produce any document, but
no person shall be compelled under any such writ to produce
any document which he could not be compelled to produce
on the trial of an action.
18. The time for making an award may from time to E~gement
time be enlarged by order of the Court whether the time for ~a~~ for
making the award has expired or not. award.
19. (1) In all cases of reference to arbitration the Court Pov.:~r to d
may from time to time remit the matters referred, or any of remý awar .
them to the reconsideration of the arbitrators or umpire.
(2) Where an award is remitted, the arbitrators or
umpire shal1, unless the order otherwise directs, make their
award within three months af ter the date of the order.
20. (1) Where an arbitrator or umpire has misconducted Po
twe~
d to
h.IfhdihChise asý e
ýmse or t  e procee ngs, t   e ourt may remove m. award.
(2) Where an arbitrator or umpire has misconduoted
himself or the proceedings, or an arbitration or award has
been improperly procured, the Court may set the award
aside.
821. An award on an arbitration agreement may, by leave Enforcing
of the Court, be enforced in the same manner as a judgment award.
or order to the same effect and in such case judgment may
be entered in terms of the award.
22. A sum directed to be paid by an award shall, unless Interest on
the award otherwise directs, carry interest as from the date awards.
of the award and at the same rate as a  judgment debt.
23. (1) Any provision in an arbitration agreement to the Provision
effect that the parties or any party thereto shall in any event as to costs.
pay their or his own costs of the reference or award or any

~ GAP. 4] ARBITRATION. i
part thereof sh::ý.ll be void and this Law shaU in the case of
ran arbitration agreement containing any such provision
have effect as if that provision were not contained therein:
Provided that nothing hercin shall invalidate such a
provision when it is part of an agreement to submit to
arbitration a  dispute which has arisen before the making i
of such agreement.
(2) if no provision is made by an award with r~spect to
the costs of the reference, any party to the reference may
within fourteen days of the publication of the award or such 8
further time as a  Court may direct apply to the arbitrator
for an order directing by and to whom such costs sha11 be
paid, and thereupon the arbitrator shall af ter hearing any
party who may desire to be heard amend his award by
adding thereto such direttiofis as he ma y think proper
with respect to the payment of the costs of the reference.
.
~ltiÝ:etif~~ 24. (l) The Laws on limitation of actiofis sha11 apply to
co~me~cing arbitrations as they apply to proceedings in the Court.
arbýtratýon
proceedings. (2) N otwithstanding any term in an arbitration agree-
ment to the effect that no cause of action shall accrue in
respect of any matter required by the agreement to be
referred until an award is inade under the agreement,
a cause ot action sha11, tor the purpose of the Laws on .
limitation of actiofis both as origina11y enacted and as
applying to arbitrations, be deemed to have accrued in
respect of any such matter at the time when it  would have
accrued but for that term in the agreement.
(3) For the purpose of this section and for the purpose of
the Laws on limitation of actiofis as applying to arbitrations,
an arbitration shall be deemed to be commenced when one
party to the arbitration agreement serves on the other party
or parties a  notice requiring him or them to appoint an
arbitrator, or, where the arbitration agreement provides 8
that the reference sha11 be to a  person named or designated
in the agreement, requiring him or them to submit the
dispute to the person so named or designated.
(4) Any such notice as is mentioned in subsection (3) of
this section may be served either-
(a) by delivering it to the person on whom it  is to be
served; or
(b) by leaving it at the usual or last known place of
abode in CyPrus of that person; or

ARBITRATION. [CAP. 4 9 i
, ..(c) by sending it  by post in. a registered Ietter addressed
~- to that person at his usual or last known place
of abode in Cyprus,
as well as in any other manner provided in the arbitration
agreement; where a notice is sent by post in manner
prescribed by paragraph (c) of this subsection, service
thereof shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to
have been effected at the time at which the Ietter would
have been delivered in the ordinary course of post.
8 .(5) Where t~e t~rms of. an agreement. to refer .future
disputes to arbýtratýon provýde that any claýms to whých the
agreement applies sha11 be barred unless notice to appoint
an arbitrator is  given or an arbitrator is appointed or some
other step to commence arbitration proceedings is taken
within a  time fixed by the agreement, and a  dispute arises
to which the agreement applies, the Court, if  it  is of opinion
that in the circumstances of the case undue hardship would
otherwise be caused, and notwithstanding that the time so
fixed has expired, may, on such terms (if any) as the justice
of the case may require, but without prejudice to the
foregoing provisions of this section, extend the time for
such period as it  thinks proper.
(6) Where the Court orders that an award be set aside or
orders, af ter the commencement of an arbitration, that the
arbitration agreement shall cease to have effect with respect
to the dispute referred, the Court may further order that the
period between the commencemen:t of the arbitration and
the date of the order of the Court shall be excluded in
computing the time prescribed by the statutes of limitation
for the commencement of proceedings (including arbitration)
with respect to the dispute referred.
(7) For the purposes of this section tt the Laws on
limifation of actions" ÝncIlide any Law or public instru-
8ment ~miting the time within which any particular
proceedýng may be commenced.
25. The Governor may from time to time appoint some Fees .an
td
tffý.
Ifdbappoýn men
fit and proper person to be the o cýa re eree, an may Y of officia!
notice in the Gazette prescribe a scale of fees to be taken by referee.
such offýcial referee.
26= (1) The Court shall have, for the purpo.se of and ~ ~:::V~~O~f
relatýon to a reference, the same power of makýng orders ýn Conrto
respect of any of the matters set out in the Second Schedule ~~~~~~le.
c. d

ýo CAP. 4] ARBITRATION. i
to this Lawasit has for the purpose of and in relation to ~
an action or matter in the Court :
rProvided that nothing in the foregoing provision shall be
taken to prejudice any power which may be vested in an
arbitrator or umpire of making orders with respect to any of
the matters aforesaid.
(2) Where relief by way of interpleader is granted and it ..
appears to the Court that the claims in question are matters -
to which an arbitration agreement to which the claimants
are parties applies, the Court may direct the issue between .-
the claimants to be determined in accordance with the
agreement.
(3) Where an application is made to set aside an award
the Court may order that any money made payable by the
award shall be brought into Court or otherwise secured
pending the determination of the application.
Statement 27. (1) An arbitrator or umpire may, and shall if so
:~=t~~ directed by the Court, state-
or umpire. (a) any question of lawarisÝng in the course of the
reference; or
(b) an award or any part of an award,
in the form of a specia! cage for the decisÝon of the Court.
(2) A specia! case with respect to an interim award or
with respect to a  question of lawarising in the course of a
reference may be stated, or may be direct ed by the Court
to be stated, notwithstanding that proceedings under the
reference are stili pending.
(3) A decision of the Court under this section shall be
deemed to be a decision of a District Court within the
meaning of paragraph (a) of þ~ction 21 of the Courts of
Cap.8. Justice Law (which relates to the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court to hear and determine appeals from any ..
decision of a District Court exercising civil jurisdictions) bui ý..
no appeal shall lie from the decision of the Court on any
cage stated under par.agraph (a) of subsection (1).of this
section without the ]eave of the Supreme Court. .
Costs. 28. Any order made under this Law may be made on
such terms as to costs, or otherwise, as the Court thinks
just.
Ta
b~ation?f 29. (l) if in any cage an arbitrator or umpire refuses to
ar ýtrator s
dý"h"dor umpire'~ e ýver ýs awar except on payment of the fees demanded
fees.

A RBITRA TION. [CAP. 4 II i
-
.
by him, the Court may, on an application for the purpose,
rorder that the arbitrator or umpire shall deliver the award
to the applicant on payment into Court by the applicant of
the fees demanded, and further that the fees demanded
shall be taxed by the taxing officer and that out of the
money paid into Court there shall be paid out to the
-arbitrator or umpire by way of fees such sum as may be
-found reasonable on taxation and that the balance of the
money (if any) shall be paid out to the applicant.
18 (2) An application for the purposes of this section may be
made by any party to the reference unless the fees
demanded have been fýxed by a written agreement between
him and the arbitrator or umpire.
(3) A taxation of fees under this section may be reviewed
in the same manneT as a  taxation of costs.
(4) The arbitrator or umpire shall be entitled to appear
and be heard on any taxation or review of taxation under
this section.
-30. The Governor, with the advice and assistance of the Rules of
Chief justice, may make Rules of Court for regulating the Court.
practice and procedure and prescribing the fees to be taken
in respect of proceedings of any kind under this Law:
Provided that until any such rules are made the Civil
Proce~ure Rule.s' and any 3;ffiendment t~ereof, sh~ apply s.L. II, 120.
mutatýs mutandýs to proceedýngs under this Law.
31. This Law shall, except as in this Law expressly Crown to be
mentioned, apply to any arbitration to which Her Majesty bound.
in right of the Crown is a  party, but nothing in this Law
shall empower the Court to order any proceedings to which
Her Majesty is  a party, or any question or issue in any such
proceedings, to be tried before any referee, arbitrator or
..officer without the consent of Her Majesty, or shall affect
..any law as to costs payable by the Crawn.
32. (L) This Law shall not affect any arbitration which Savi~g for
has commenced before the date of the coming into force of ~~i~~tons.
this Law butshall apply to any arbitration commenced af ter
the coming into operation of this Law under any agreement
ororder made before the coming into operatiün of this Law.
(2) For the purposes of this section, an arbitration shall
be deemed to have commenced when one party to the
arbitration agreement serves on the other party or parties
d (2)

12 CAP. 4] ARBITRATION. i
-
a notice requiring him or them to appoint an arbitrator, or.
r-
where the arbitration agreement p!ovides ~hat the reference
shaU be to a person named or desýgnated ýn the agreement,
requiring bim or them to submit the dispute to the person
so named or designated.
~~~tes ~. Tý:is La,,! sha1l not apply to any }?roceedings o~ .an
(Co~ci1ia.ti°n, i\;rbýtratý?n Tnbunal under the Trade Dýsputes (Concilia-
~~ýr:~~~) týo~, ArbýtýatÝon and Inquiry) Law, or to any award issued
Law, not by ýt. ..
afiected. ,.
Gap. 187.
FIRST SCHEDULE.
(Section 6.)
PROVISIONS TO BE IMPLIED IN ARBITRATION AGREEMENTS.
1. if  no other mode of reference is provided, thereference shall be to a
single arbitrator.
2. if the reference is to two arbitrators, the two arbitrators shall
appoint an umpire immediately af ter theyare themselves appointed.
3. if the arbitrators have deIivered to any party to the arbitration
agreement, or to theumpire a notice in writing, stating that they cannot
agree, the umpire may forthwith enter on the reference in Iieu of the
arbitrators.
4. The parties to the reference, and all persons claiming through them
respectively, shall, subject to any legal objection, subýnit to be examined
by the arbitrators or umpire, on oath or affirmation, in relation to the
matters in dispute, and shall, subject as aforesaid, produce before the
arbitrators or umpire, all books, deeds, papers, accounts, writings and
documents within their possession or power respectively which may be
required or called for, and do all other things which during the proceed-
ings on the reference the arbitrators or umpire may require.
5. The witnesses on the reference shall, if  the arpitrators or umpire
thin~ fit, be examined on oath or affirmation.
6. The award to be made by the arbitrators or umpire shall be in
writing and it  shall be final and binding on the parties and the persons
claiming und~r them respectively. 8
7. The costs of the reference and award shall be in the discretion of the
arbitrators or umpire, who may direct to and by whom and in what
manneT those costs or any part thereof shall be paid, and may tax or
settIe the amount of costs to be so paid or any part thereof.
8. The arbitrators or umpire shall have the same power as the Court
to order specific performance of any contract other than a  contract
reIating to land or any interest in land.
9. The arbitrators or umpire may, if  they think fit, make an interim
award.
-

A RBITRA TION. [CAP. 4 13 i
SECOND SCHEDULE. i
(Section 26.)
rMATTERS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COURT MA Y MAKE ORDERS.
1. Security for costs.
2. Discovery of documents and interrogatories.
3. The giving of evidence by affidavit.
4. Examination on oath of any witness before an officer of the Courtor
any other person, and the issue of a  commission or request for the
examination of a witness out of the jurisdiction.
8 5. The preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the
subject matter of the reference.
6. Securing the amount in dispute in the reference.
7. The detention, preservation or inspection of any property or thing
which is the subject of the reference or as to which any question may arise
therein, and authorizing for any of the purposes aforesaid any persons to
enter upon or into any land or building in the possession of any party to
the reference, or authorizing any samples to be taken or any observation
to be made or experiment to be tried which may be necessary or expedient
for the purpose of obtaining full information orevidence.
8. Interim injunctions or the appointment of a receiver.
8