

-,"-":: .~~- --,- i
~
CAP. 5. .
~
CYPRUS
-
BANKRUPTCY
CHAPTER 5 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8'
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV, LONDON, W.l
[A ppmmed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printerslof this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959

D "'~UD"D'Trv ",. D .1 1
BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 1 i
;  ,
.
CHAPTER 5. ~
BANKRUPTCY.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
..1 Short title 4
.2 Interpretation 4
PART I.
PROCEEDINGS FROM ACT OF BANKRUPTCY TO DISCHARGE
3 What constitutes an acý of bankruptcy 5
Receiving Order
4 ]urisdiction to make receiving order 7
5 Conditions on which creditor may petition 7
6 Proceedings and order on creditor's petition 8
7 Creditor's petition cannot be withdrawn 9
8 Debtor's petition 9
9 Effect of receiving order 0.0 ..0 9
10 Power to appoint interim receiver 10
11 Power to stay pending proceedings 10
12 Power to appoint special manager 10
13 Advertisement of receiving order 11
Proceedings Consequent on Order
14 First and other meetings of creditors o.. 11
15 Debtor's statement of affairs 11
Public Examination of Debtor
16 Public examination of debtor 12
Composition of Scheme of Arrangement
17 Compositions and schemes of arrangements 13
18 Effect of composition or scheme 16
Adjudication of Bankruptcy
19 AdjudicatioIl; of bankruptey where composition not accepted or
approved 16
20 Appointment of trustee 16
21 Committee of inspection 17
22 Power to accept composition or scheme af ter bankruptcy adjudication 19
8 Controlover Person and Property of Debtor
23 Duties of debtor as to discovery and realisation of property ...19
24 Arrest of debtor under certain circumstances 20
25 Re-direction of debtor's letters, ete. 21
26 Inquiry as to debtor's conduct, dealings and property 22
27 Discharge of bankrupt 23
28 Procedure on failure of bankrupt to apply for discharge ...26
29 Duties of discharged bankrupt 26
30 Effect of order of discharge 26
31 Power for Court to annul adjudication in certain cases ...27
PART II.
DISQUALIFICATIONS OF BANKRUPT
32 Disqualifications of undischarged bankrupt 28
33 Office vacated by bankruptey of holder thereof 28

2 CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCYol
ý PART III. .
~ ADMINISTRATION OF PROPERTY
~~ P"ovable Debts
Section Page
34 Description of debts provable in bankruptcy 28
35 Mutua! credit and set off 29
App"op,.iation of Assets
36 Payment ofpreliminary expenses 30
37 Rulesastoproofofdebts 30
38 Priority ofdebts 000 ...31
39 Postponement of husband's and wife's claims 32
P"operly Available fO1' Payment of Debts 8
40 Relation back of trustee's title 32
41 Description of bankrupt's property divisible amongst creditors ...33
42 Property not divisable amongst creditors 33
43 Provisions as to second bankruptcy and dea!ings with persons
adjudged bankrupts 34
Effect of Bank"uptcy on Antecedent T"ansactions
44 Restriction of rights of creditors under execution or attachment ...35
45 Duties of sheriff as to goods taken in execution 36
46 Avoidance of certain settlements 37
47 Avoidance ofpreferences in certain cases 38
48 Protection of bana Ifde transactions without notice 38
Realization of P"ope"ty
49 Vesting and transfer of property 39
50 Possession of property by trustee 39
51 Seizure of the property of bankrupt 40
52 Appropriation of portian of pay or salary to creditors 40
53 Disclaimer of onerous property 41
54 Powers of trustee to dea! with property 43
55 Powers exercisable by trustee with permission of committ~ of
inspection... 44
56 Right of trustee to inspect goods pawned, etc. 45
57 Protection of officia! receivers and trustees from personal liability in
certain cases 45
Dist"ibution of P"OPe1'ty
58 Declaration and distribution of dividends 45
59 Joint and separate dividends 46
60 Provision for creditors residing at a  distance, etc. 46
61 Right of creditor who has not proved debt before declaration of a
dividend 47
62 Interest on debts '" 47
63 Final dividend 47
64 No action for dividend ,. 47
65 Power to allow bankrupt to manage property 48
66 Right of bankrupt to surplus 48
8PART ýv.
OFFICIAL RECEIVERS
67 Appointment by Governor of officia! receivers of debtor's estates ...48
68 Status of officia! receiver 49
69 Duties of officia! receiver as regards the debtor's conduct ...49
70 Duties of officia! receiver as regards debtor's estate 49
PART V.
TRUSTEES IN BANKRUPTCY
71 Officia! name of trustee 50
72 Power to appoint joint or successive trustees 51
73 Proceedings in case of vacancy in office of trustee 51
74 Discretionary powers of trustee and control thereof 51
75 Appeal to Court against trustee 52~

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 3 i
.
--
Section Page.
76 Officia! rec~iver to inquire inm the conduct of the trustee o.. 52
r77 Remuneratýon of trustee 000 0'0 o.. 00. 52
78 Al1owance and taxation of costs 000 ...00. 53
79 Trustee not to pay money into private account o o. o.. 54
80 Accounts oftrusteeo Payments 0.0 000 o" 54
8l Returns of accounts to officia! receiver .0 o o o o o.. 54
82 Release of trustee 000 0'0 0.0 000 55
83 Power of the Court to grant or withhold release of trustee o ..55
84 Effect of release of trustee o .o 55
85 Trustee becoming bankrupt .0. 000 '00 56
86 Creditors may remove trustee 0.0 000 000 56
PART VIo
8 JURISDICTION, PROCEDURE AND POWERS OF,COURTo
87 J urisdiction to be exercised by District Courts o ..o ..56
88 Petition where to be presented 000 0.0 0'0 56
89 Case stated for the opinion of the Supreme Court 000 000 57
90 General powers and jurisdiction of Courts in bankruptcy o o o 57
9l Courts of bankruptcy in Cyprus to be auxiliary to other British Courts
of Bankruptcy 000 000 000 000 57
92 Appeal 000 000 o.. 000 000 58
93 Discretionary powers of the Court ..o o o o O' o 58
94 Consolidation of petitions 000 00. 000 000 58
95 Power to change carriage of proceedings 00' 00' 58
96 Continuance of proceedings on death of debtor 000 000 59
97 Power to stay proceedings 000 000 0.0 59
98 Power to present petition against one partner 000 000 59
99 Actions by trustee and bankrupt's partners 000 000 59
ýoo Proceeding in partnership name ...000 '000 59
ýoý Actionsonjointcontractsooo "0 00. 0.0 59
102 Formal defect not to invalidate proceedings 000 000 60
l03 Summary administration in smaIl cases ..0 0'0 000 60
,   PART Vii.
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS.
l04 Exclusion of partnership and companies 000 o.. 60
l05 Application to limited partnerships o. o ...o o o 60
l06 Who ýnay be adjudged bankrupt ..0 000 000 6l
l07 Administration in bankruptcy of estate of person dying insolvent o o o 6l
l08 Power to make general rules 00. 0.0 000 62
l09 Fees, charges, etc., of officia! receiver 000 000 000 62
ýýo Gazette to be evidence 000 000 000 000 63
III Evidence of proceedings at meetings of creditors o o o o o. 63
ll2 Evidence of proceedings in bankruptcy 000 .00 000 63
113 Swearing of affidavits o.. '00 0.0 000 64
114 Death of debtor or wituess 000 0.0 0.0 64
115 Disposa! of unclaimed funds or dividends 000 000 64
116 Punishment of fraudulent debtors o o o o o o o o o 64
117 Undischarged bankrupts obtaining credit 0.0 000 67
8118 Frauds by bankrupts 0.0 000 000 000 68
119 Punishment of persons removing, etco, property of bankrupt .o o 68
l20 Fa1se claims, declarations, etco, against bankrupt o.. 000 68
l2l Punishment of trustee for concealment, etc., of affairs of bankiupt o o o 69
l22 Bankrupt failing to keep proper accorints o. .o o. 69
l23 Bankrupt guilty of gambling, etc. o .o o .o o o o 70
l24 Bankrupt absconding with property .o o o. o o o o 7l
l25 Prosecution of offences 0'0 000 000 000 7l
l26 Criminalliabi1ity after discharge or composition .,.0 000 7l
SCÝiEDULEso
FIRST SCHEDULEo
MEETINGS OF CREDITORSo
SECOND SCHEDULEo
PROOF OF DEBTSo

4 CAP.5.]. BANKRUPTCY, ,~-- i
To AMEND AND CONSOLIDATE THE LAW OF BANKRUPTCY.
r1949 Cap. 6. [1st ]  anuary, 1931.].
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Bankruptcy Law.
I~terpreta. 2 In this Law-
týon. .
tt available act of bankruptcy" means any act of
bankruptcy available for a  bankruptcy petition at the
date of the presentation of the petition on which the
8receiving order is made ;
tt the Court "  means the Court having jurisdiction in
bankruptcy under this Law;
tt debt provablein bankruptcy "  or tt provable debt "
includes any debt or liability by this Law made
provable in bankruptcy ;
tt gazetied" means published in the Gazette;
tt general rules "  ÝncIlide forms ;
tt goods "  ÝncIlide all chattels personal and movable
property ;
tt ordinary resolution" means aresolution decided
by a  majority in value of the creditors present, person-
ally or by proxy, at a  meeting of creditors and voting
on the resolution;
tt prescribed" means prescribed by general rules
within the meaning of this Law;
tt property "  includes money, goods, things in action,
land, and every description of property whether
movable or immovable, and whether situate in Cyprus
or elsewhere; also, obligations, easements, and every
description of estate, interest and profit, present or
future, vested or contingent~ arising out of or incident
to property as above defýned ;
tt resolutian "  means ordinary resolution; a
tt secured creditor" means a person holding a .
mortgage, pledge, charge or lien on the property of the
debtor, or any part thereof, as a  security for a debt
dile to him from the debtor ;
t t sheriff " includes any offiter charged with the
execution of a  writ or other process; .
tt special resolutian "  means aresolution decided by
a majority in number and three-fourths in value of
the creditors present, personally or by proxy, at a
meeting of creditors and voting on the resolution;

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 5 i
r "-
ii  tnýstee" means the tnýstee in bankruptey of a
rdebtor's estate.
PART I.
PROCEEDINGS FROM ACT OF BANKRUPTCY TO DýSCHARGE.
3. (1) A debtor commits an act of bankruptey in each of Wha
ti~
t  t.cons u es
the followýng cases:- an acý of
(a) if  in Cyprus or elsewhere he makes a conveyance or bankru~tcy.
8 assignment of his property to any person for the
benefit of his creditors generally ;
(b) if in Cypnýs or elsewhere he makes a fraudulent
conveyance, gift, delivery or transfer of his
property or of any part thereof ;
(C) if  in Cypnýs or elsewhere he makes any conveyance
or transfer of his property or any part thereof,
or creates any charge thereon, which would
under this or any other Law be void as a
fraudulent preference if he were adjudged
banknýpt ;
(d) if with intent to defeat or detay his creditors he
does any of the following things, namely-
(i) departs or makes preparation for departing,
out of Cypnýs, or being out of Cypnýs, remains
out of Cypnýs; or
(ii) departs from his dwelling house or other-
wise absents himseli; or
(iii) begins to keep house;
(e) if  execution against him has been levied by seizure
of his goods under process in action in any Court,
and the goods seized have either been sold or
held by the sheriff tor twenty-one days, provided
that, where an interpleader application has been
8 made in regard to the goods seized, the time
elapsing between the date at which such applica-
tion has been made and the date at which the
proceedings on such application are finally
disposed of, settled, or abandoned, shall not be
taken into account in calculating 'such period
of twenty-one days ;
(f) if  he files in the Court a  declaration of his inability
to pay his debts or presents a bankruptey
petition against himself ;
(g) if  a  creditor has obtained a  final judgment or final

6 CA,P. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
~
order. against him for any amount., and, execu- -
tion thereon not having beenstayed, has served
ron him in Cyprus, or, by leave of the Court,
elsewhere, a  bank~p~cy notice under this La.w,
and he does not, wýthin seven days af ter servýce
of the notice, in case the service is effected in
Cyprus, and in cage the service is effected else- i
where, then within the time limited in that
behalf by the order giving leave to effect the
service, either comply with the requirements of A
the notice or satisfy the Courf that he has a ..
counterclaim, set-off or cross demand which
equals or exceeds the amount of the judgment
debt or sum ordered to be paid, and which he
could not set up in the action in which the
judgment was obtained, or the proceedings in
which the order was obtained.
For the purpose of this section any person who
is, for the time being entitled, to enforce a final
judgment or final order, shall be deemed to be
a creditor who has obtained a final judgment or
final order;
(h) it  being indebted to a  creditor in virtue of a  debt
provable in bankruptcy, he fai1s to pay, or
secure, or coÝnpound for, such debt, within such
time as shall be allowed by an order made by the
Court upon the application of the creditor,
provided always no such appIication shall be
entertained by the Court, unless a  bankruptcy
notice, req Iliring payment of such debt, has
first been served upon him, and he has had
notice of such appIication and has been called
upon to show cause against the same ;
(i) if  he has admitted to any of his creditors that he is
unable to meet his engagements or that he has 8
suspended or is about to suspend the payment of
his debts.
(2) In this Law, the expression tt a  debtor," unless the
context otherwise implies, includes any person, who at the
time when any act of bankruptcy waS done or suffered by
him-
(a) was personally present in Cyprus ;  or
(b) ordinarily resided or had a  place of residence in
Cyprus; or
--

", BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 7 i
.
-
(c) was carrying on business in Cyprns, personally, or -
by means of an agent or manager; or
~(d) was a. member Ü;f a ~rm or partnership which
carned on bu~ýness ýn Cyprns.
(3) A bankrnptcy notice under this Law shall be in the
prescribed form, and shall require the debtor to pay the
judgment debi or sum ordered to be paid in accordance with
the terms of the judgment or order, or to secure or com-
8pound for it to the satisfaction of the creditor or the Court,
.and" shall state the consequences of non-compIiance with
t.he notice, and shall be served in the presoribed manýýer :
Provided that a  bankrnptcy notice-
(a) may specify an agent to act on behalf of the
creditor in respect of any payment or other thing
required by the notice to be made to, or done to
the satisfaction of, the creditor ;
(b) shall not be invalidated by reason only that "the
sum specifýed in the notice as the amount due
exceeds the amount actually due, unless the
debtor within the time allowed for payment
gives notice to the creditor that he disputes the
validity of the notice on the ground of such
misstatement ;  bui, if  the debtor does not give
such notice, he shall be deemed to have compIied
with the bankrnptcy notice if within the time
allowed he takes such steps as would have
constituted a compliance with the notice had
the actual amount due been correctly specifýed
therein.
Receiving Order.
..
4. Subject to the conclitiofis hereinafter specifýed, if a jurisdiction
-debtor commits an act of bankrnptcy the Court may, on a  to ~a.ke
..bankrnptcy petition being presented either by a  creditor or ~~~e;lng
by the debtor, make an order. in this Law called tt a
receiving order," for the protection of the debtor's estate.
5. (1) A creditor shall not be entitled to preseni a bank- Condi~ons
rnptcy petition against a  debtor unless- ~:ed'Tt~~~y
(a) the debi owing by the debtor to the petitioning petition.
creditor, or, iftwo or more creditors join in the
petition, the aggregate amount of debts owing
to the several petitioning cteditors amounts to
fýfty polinds, and
c_-"-

8 GAP, 5] BANKRUPTCY. i
.
(b) the debt is a liquidated sum, payable either
rj immediately or at some certain future time, and
(C) the act of bankruptcy on which the petition is
grounded has occurred within three months
before the presentation of the petition, and
(d) the debtor is domiciled in Cyprus or, within a  year
before the date of the presentation of the
petition, has ordinarily resided or had a dwelling
house or place of business in Cyprus or has
carried on business in Cyprus, personally, or by 8
means of an agent or manager, or is or within
the said period has been a  member of a  firm or
partnership of persons which has carried on
business in Cyprus by means of a partner or
partners or an agent or manager.
(2) If the petitioning creditor is a  secured creditor, he
must, in his petition, either state that he is willing to give
up his security for the benefit of the creditors in the event of
the debtor being adjudged bankrupt, or give an estimate of
the value of his security. In the latter cage he may be
admitted as a petitioning creditor to the extent of the
balance of the debt due to him, af ter deducting the value so
estimated in the same manýýer as if he were an unsecured
creditor. .
Proceedings 6. (1) A creditor's petition shall be verified by affýdavit
and order on
fhd.fh,b  hIfh. creditor's O t  e  cre ýtor, or o some person on ýs e a avýng
petition. knowledge of the facts, and served in the prescribed manner.
(2) At the hearing of the petition, the Court shall require
proof of the debt of the petitioning creditor, of the service
of the petition, and of the act of bankruptcy, or, if  more than
one act of bankruptcy isalleged in the petition, of some one
of the alleged acts of bankruptcy, and, if  satisfied with such
proof, shall make a receiving order in pursuance of the
petition. 8
(3) The Court may adjoum the hearing of the petition
either conditionally or unconditionally, for obtaining
further evidence, or for any other just cause or may dismiss
': co.. the petition with or without costs, as the Court thinks just.
": (4) When the act of bankruptcy relied on is non'"
eompliance with a bankruptcy notice to pay, secure or
compound for a  judgment debt or sum ordered to be paid,
the Courtmay, if it thinks fit, stay or dismiss the petition
on the ground that an appeal is  pending from the judgment
or order.

BANKRUPTCY. -[CAP. 5. 9 i
-
(5) If  there are more respondents than one to the petition, .
~~ the Court may dismiss the petition as to one or more of
them, and may order the case to be proceeded with against
the other or others ofthem.
(6) Where the debtor appears on the petition, and denies
that he is indebted to the petitioner, or that he is indebted
to such an amount as would justify the petitioner in
presenting a petition against him, the Court, on such security
(if any) being given as the Court may require for payment
18 to the petitioner of any debt which may be established
against him in due course of law, and of the costs of
establishing the debt, may, instead of dismissing the
petition, stay all proceedings on the petition for such time
as may be required for tria! of the question relating to the
debt.
(7) Where the debtor appears on the petition, and denies
that he is indebted to the petitioner, or that he is indebted
to such an amatint as would justify the petitioner in
presenting a bankruptcy petition against him, the Court shall
have jurisdiction for the trial of the question relating to such
debt, subject to an appeal before the Supreme Court as
herein provided and in the meantime all proceedings on the
petition shall be stayed pending the result of such trial as
aforesaid.
(8) Where proceedings are stayed, the Court may, if by
reason of the delay caused by the stay of proceedings or for
any other cause if  it  thinks just, make a receiving order on
.the petition of some other creditor, and shall thereupon
dismiss, on such terms as it thinks just, the petition in which
proceedings have been stayed as aforesaid.
7. A creditor's petition shall not, af ter presentment be Cre.d~tors
withdrawn without the le~ve of the Court. ~:~~o~nbe
..withdrawn.
,., S. (1) A  debtor's petition shall allege that the debtor is Deý;ýt.or's
unable to pay his debts, and the presentation theroof sha!l petýtýon.
be deemed an act of bankruptcy without the previous filing
.by the debtor _of any declaration of inabi.lityto pay his debts,
and the Court shall thereJlpon make areceiving order.
-.
-(2) A debtor'þ petition shall not, af ter ptesentment, be
withdrawn without the leave of the Court.
9. (1) On the making of a receiving order, an officÝal Eff~t.of
receÝver shall be thereby constÝtutedreceÝver of the property ~~~~;ýng

10CAP. 5.] BA~KRiUPTCY. i
of thed.ebtor and thereafter, exc.e~t as direc!ed by this Law, -
no credýtor to whom the debtorýs ýndebted ýn respect of any
rdebt probablein bankruptcy shallhave any remedy against
the property or person of the debtor in respect of the debt,
or shall commence any action or other legal proceedings,
unless with the leave of the Court and on such terms as the
Court may impose.
(2) But this section shall not affect the power of any
secured creditor to realize or otherwise deal with his security
in the same manner as he would have been entitled to -
realize or dea! with it, if  this section had not been passed. ..
Powý;r:o 10. The Court may, if  it  is  shown to be necessary for the
~~~ protection of the debtor's estate, at any time af ter the
receiver. presentation of a bankruptcy petition, and before a receiving
order is made, appoint the officia! receiver to be interim
receiver of the property of the debtor, or of any part
thereof, and direct him to take immediate possession of the
same or any part thereof.
Power 11. (1) The Court may, at any time af ter the presentation
to stay
fbk...t. pending o a an ruptcy petýtýon, stay any actýon, execu ýon, or
proceedings. other legal process against the property or person of the
debtor, and any Court in which proceedings are pending
against a  debtor may, on proof that a bankruptcy petition
has been presented by or against the debtor, either stay the
proceedings or allow them to continue upon such terms as
it  may think just.
(2) Where the Court makes an order staying any action
or proceeding, or staying proceedings generally, the order
may be served by sending a  copy thereof, under the seat
of the Court, by post to the address for service of the plaintiff
or other party prosecuting such proceeding.
Powý;r to 12. (1) The offýcial receiver of a debtor's estate may, on
~E~ci~~t the application of any creditor ,or creditors, an~ if  satisfýed
8manager. that the nature of the debtor s  estate or busýness of the
jnterests of the creditors generally require the appointment
of a specia! manager of the estate or business other than the
officia! receiver, appoint, subject to the approva! of the
Court, a manager thereof accordingly to act until a trustee is
appointed, and with such powers (including any of the
powers of a receiver} as may be entrusted to him by the
officia! receiver.
(2) The special manager shall give such security and
account in such manýýer as may be direct ed by the Court.
-

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 11 i
~
(3) The special manager sha11 receive such remuneration .
as shall be fixed by the creditors by resolution at an ordinary
~meeting subject to the approval of the Court or in default
of any such resolution as the Court maydetermine.
13. Notice of every receiving order stating the name, Adv~rt~se-
address, and description of the debtor, the date of the :iv?ng
order, the Court by which the order is made, and the date of order.
the petition, sha11 be gazetted and advertised in two local
a. papers, that is to say, one of which is published in the
..Turkish and the other in the Greek language in the pre-
scribed manner.
Proceeding Consequent on Order.
14. (1) As soon as may be af ter the making of a receiving F:r;t and
order against a debtor, a general meeting of his creditors (in ~e:~ngs of
this Law referred to as the fýrst meeting of creditors) sha11 be creditors.
held for the purpose of considering whether a  proposal for
a  composition or scheme of arrangement sha11 be accepted
or whether it  is expedient that the debtor sha11 be adjudged
bankrupt, and genera11y as to the mode of dealing with the
debtor's property.
(2) With respect to the summoning of and proceedings §~td 1
as to meetings of creditors, the rules in the First Schedule c e u e.
to this Law sha11 be observed.
15. (1) Where a receiving order is made against a debtor, ~e~tor'st
he sha11 make out and submit to the official receiver a  ~faa~~~.
statement of and in relation to his affairs in the prescribed
form, verifýed by affidavit, and showing the particulars of
the debtor's assets, debts, and liabilities, the names,
residences and occupations of his creditors, the securities
held by them respectively, the dates when the securities
were respectively given, and such further or other informa-
8 tion .as may be prescribed or as the official receiver may
requýre.
(2) The statement sha11 be so submitted within the
following times, namely :-
(a) if  the order is made on the petition of the debtor,
within three days from the date of the order;
(b) if the order is made on the petition of a  creditor,
within seven days from the date of the order.
But the Court may, in either cage for special reasons,
extend the time.
c. e
;1
~

12CAP.5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
(3) if the d"ebtor fails without reasonable excuse to -
comply with the requirements of this section, the Court may,
r-
on the application of the officia! receiver, or of any creditor,
adjudge him bankrupt.
(4) Any person stating himseli in writing to be a creditor
of the bankrupt may, personally or by agent, inspect the
statement at all reasonable times, and take any copy
thereof.or e~tract therefrom, but. any person untruthfully
so statýng himseli to be a creditor shall be guilty of a ,
contempt of Court, and shall be punishable accordingly on -
the application of the trustee or officia! receiver. ..
Public Examination of Debtor.
Publi~ ti 16. (1) Where the Court makes a receiving order, it  shaU,
~~~~b~~.on save as in this Law provided, hold a public sitting, on aday
to be appointed by the Court, for the examination of the
debtor, and the debtor shall attend thereat, and shall be
examined as to his conduct, dealings and property.
(2) The examination shall be held as soan as conveniently
may be af ter the expiration of the time for the submission
of the debtor's statement of affairs.
(3) The Court may adjoum the examination from time
to time.
(4) Any creditor who has tendered a proof, or his represen-
tative authorized in writing, may, subject to the discretion
of the Court, question the debtor conceming his affairs and
the causes of his failure.
(5) The officia! receiver shall take part in the examination
of the debtor; and for the purpose thereof, if specially
authorized by the Court, may emplay an advocate.
(6) if  a trustee is appointed before the conclusion of the a
examination, he may take part therein. ..
(7) The Court may put such questions to the debtor as it
may think expedient.
(8) The debtor shall be examined upon oath, and it  shall
be his duty to answer all such questions as the Court may
put or allow to be put to him. Such notes of the examination
a$ the Court thinks proper shall be taken down in writing
and shall be read over to and signed by the debtor, or in the
case of an illiterate debtor his mark shall be affixed thereto,

BANKRUPTCY.. [GAP. 5. 13 i
-
and may thereafter, save as in this Law provided, be used in
evidence against him; they shall also be open to the
inspection of any creditor at all reasonable times..
(9) When the Court is of opinion that the affairs of the
debtor have been suffýciently investigated, it  shall by order
declare that his examination is concluded; but such order
shall not be made until af ter the day appointed for the fýrst
meeting of creditors..a. 
(10) Where t~e debt~r i~ a  luna~ic o~ ~uffers !rom any..s~ch.., 
mental or physýcal afflýctýon or disability as ýn the opýnýon
of the Court makes him unfýt to attend his public examina-
tion, the Court may make an order dispensing with such
examination, or directing that the debtor be examined on
such terms, in such manner, and at such place as to the Court
seems expedient..
Composition or Scheme of Arrangement..
ý 7. (1) Where a debtor intends to make a proposal for Compositiona
f..f  h..dbtalfand schemes
a  composýtýon ýn satýs actýon O ýs e s, or a propos or a of arrange-
scheme of arrangement of his affairs, he shall, within four ment.
days of submitting his statement of affairs, or within such
time thereafter as the offýcial receiver may fýx, lodge with
the offýcial receiver a proposal in writing, signed by him, or
on his behalf embod~g the terms of the composition or
scheme which he is desirous of submitting for the considera-
tion of his creditors, and setling out particulars of any
su~eties or securities proposed..
(2) In such case the offýcial receiver shall hold a meeting
of creditors, before the public examination of the debtor is
concluded, and send to each creditor, before the meeting, a
copy of the debtor's proposal with areport thereon ;  and if
at that meeting a  majority in number and three-fourths in
value of all the creditors who have proved, resolve to accept
8 the proposal, it  shall be deemed to be duJy accepted by the
creditors, and when approved by the Court shall be binding
on all the creditors..
(3) The debtor may at the meeting amend the terms of
his proposal, if the amendment is, in the opinion of the
offýcial receiver, calculated to benefýt the general body of
creditors..
(4) Any creditor who has proved his debt may assent to
or dissent from the proposal by aletter, in the prescribed
form, addressed to the offýcial receiver so as to be received
e (2)

14 CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
by him not later than the day preceding the meeting, and
rany such assent or dissent shall have effect as if the creditor had been present and had voted at the meeting.
(5) The debtor or the offýcial receiver may, af ter the
proposal is accepted by the creditors, apply to the Court to
approve it, and notice of the time appointed for hearing the
application shall be given to each creditor who has proved.
(6) The application shall not be heard until af ter the
conclusion of the public examination of the debtor. Any
creditor who has proved may be heard by the Court in 8
opposition to the application, notwithstanding that he may
at a meeting of creditors have voted for the acceptance of the
proposal.
(7) For the purpose of approving a composition or scheme
by joint debtors, the Court may, if it thinks fýt, and on the
report of the offýcial receiver that it is expedient so to do,
dispense with the public examination of one of the joint
debt.ürs if he is unavoidably prevented from attending the
examination by illness or absence from Cyprus.
(8) The Court sha11, before approving the proposal, hear
a report of the offýcial receiver as to the terms thereof, and as
to the conduct of the debtor, and any objections which may
be made by or on behalf of any creditor.
(9) if the Court is of apiýýion that the terms of the
proposal are not reasonable, or are not calculated to benefýt
the general body of creditors, or in any cage in which the
Court is required where the debtor is adjudged bankrupt
to refuse his discharge, the Court sha11 refuse to approve the
propogaý.
(10) if any facts are proved on proof of which the Court
would be required either to refuse, suspend, or attach con-
ditions to the debtor's discharge were he adjudged bankrupt,
the Court shall refuse to approve the propogaý, unless it
8provides reasonable security for the payment of not less
than fýve shillings in the pound on all the unsecured debts
provable against the debtor's estate.
(11) In any other cage the Court may either approve or
refuse to approve the propogaý.
(12) if the Court approves the proposal, the approval may
be testifýed by the seat of the Court being attached to the
instrument containing the terms of the proposed composi-
tion or scheme, or by the terms being embodied in an order
of the Court.

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP.5. 15 1
(13) A composition or scheme accepted and approved in
r-
pursuance of this section shal1 be binding on all the creditors
so far as relates to any debts due to them from the debtor
and provable in bankruptcy.
(14) A certificate of the official receiver that a composition
or scheme has been duly accepted and approved shall, in
the absence of fraud, be conclusive as to its validity.
8 (15) The provisions of a composition or scheme under this
section may be enforced by the Court on appIication byany
person interested, and any disobedience of an order of the
Court made on the appIication shal1 be deemed a  contempt
of Court.
(16) if default is made in payment of any instalrnent due
in pursuance of the composition or scheme, or if  it  appears
to the Court, on satisfactory evidence, that the composition
or scheme cannot, in consequence of legal difficulties, or for
any sufficient cause, proceed without injustice or undue
detay to the creditors or to the debtor, or that the approval
of the Court was obtained by fraud, the Court may, if it
thinks fit, on appIication by the official receiver or the
trustec, or by any creditor, adjudge the debtor bankrupt,
and annul the composition or scheme, but without prejudice
to the vaIidity of any sale, dispositian, or payment duly
made, or thing duly done, under or in pursuance of the
composition or scheme.. Where a debtor is adjudged
bankrupt under this sub-section, any debt provable in other
respects, which has been contraClted before the adjudication,
shal1 be provable in the bankruptcy.
(17) if under or in pursuance of a  composition or scheme
8a  trustee is appointed to administer the debtor's property
or manage his business, or to distribute the composition,
section 26 and Part V. of this Law shall apply as if the
trustee were a  trustee in bankruptcy, and as if the terms
tt bankruptcy," tt bankrupt," and tt order of adjudication,"
included respectively a  composition or scheme of arrange-
ment, a compounding or arranging debtor, and order
approving the composition or scheme.
(18) Part III. of this Law shall, so far as the nature of the
cage and the terms of the composition or scheme admit,
apply thereto, the same interpretation being given to the

16 CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
words, ýý trustee," ýý bankruptcy," ýý bankrupt "  and ýý order ~
of adjudication "  as in the last preceding subsection.
r(19) No composition or scheme shall be approved by the
Court which does not provide for the payment in priority to
other debts of all debts direct ed to be so paid in the distribu-
tion of the property of a bankrupt.
(20) The acceptance by a creditor of a composition or
scheme shall not release any person who under this Law
would not be released by an order of discharge if  the debtor
8~ad been adjudged bankrupt.
Effect ':ýf. ýs. Notwithstanding the acceptance and approval of a
composttian .
t O
hh..
hhallor scheme. composý ýon or sc erne, suc composýtýon or sc erne s
not be binding on any creditor so far as regards a  debt or
liability from which, under the provisions of this Law the
debtor would not be discharged by an order of discharge in
bankruptcy, unless the creditor assents to the composition
or schemeo
Adjudication of Bankruptcyo
Adjudication 19. (1) Where a receiving order is made against a debtor,
~p~~;k- then if  the creditors at the fýrst meeting or any adjoumment
whý:r~ com- thereof by ordinary resolution resolve that the debtor be
posýtion not
d O
dd  bktIo O
f   hd.
accepted or a Ju ge an rup "  or pass no reso utýon, or i   t   e cre ýtors
approved. do not meet, or if  a  composition or scheme is not approved
in pursuance of this Law within fourteen days af ter the
conclusion of the examination of the debtor or such further
time as the Court may allow the Court shall adjudge the
debtor bankrupt; and thereupon the property of the
bankrupt shall become divisible among his creditors and
shall vest in a trustec.
(2) Notice of every order adjudging a  debtor bankrupt,
stating the name, address, and description of the bankrupt, A
the date of the adjudication and the Court by which the .,
adjudication is made, shall be gazetted and advertised in
two local papers, that is to say, one of which is published in
the Turkish and the other in the Greek language in the
prescribed manner, and the date of the order shall for the
purpose of this La,\! be the date of the adjudication.
Appoint- 20. (1) Where a debtor is adjudged bankrupt or the
~~i~f creditors have resolved that he be adjudged bankrupt, the
creditors may by ordinary resolution appoint some fýt
person, whether a  creditor or not, to fýll the office of trustee

/ BANKRUPTCY. [CAP.5. 17 i
.
of the property of the bankrupt; or they may resolve to -
~leave his appointment to the committee of inspection
hereinafter mentioned.
(2) A  person shaIl be deemed not fýt to act as trustee of
the property of a  bankrupt vvhen he has been previously
removed from the office of trustee of a bankrupt's property
for misconduct or neglect of duty.
(3) The person so appointed shaIl give security in such
~ amount as shall be fýxed by the Court and the Court if
., satisfýed vvith the seourity shaIl certify that his appointment
has been duty made, uruess the debtor or a creditor objects
to the appointment, and the Court is satisfýed that such
appointment has not been made in good faith by a majority
in value of the oreditors voting, or that the person appointed
is not fýt to act as trustee, or that his connection vvith or
relation to the bankrupt or his estate or any particular
creditor makes it  diffýcult for him to act vvith impartiality in
the interests of the creditors generaIlyo
(4) The appointment of a trustee shaIl take effect as from
the date of the certifýcate.
(5) if a trustee is not appointed by the creditors vvithin
four vveeks from the date of the adjudication, or in the event
of there being negotiations for a  oomposition or scheme
pending at the expiration of those four vveeks, then vvithin
seven days from the close of those negotiations by the
refusal of the creditors to accept, or of the Court to approve,
the oomposition or scheme, the offýcial receiver shall report
the matter to the Court and thereupon the Court may
appoint some fýt person to be trustee of the bankrupt's
property or may order the offýcial receiver to act as trustee.
(6) When a  debtor is adjudged bankrupt after the fýrst
meeting of creditors has been held, and a trustee has not
been appointed prior to the adjudication, the offýcial
8 receiver shaIl forthvvith summon a meeting of creditors for
the purpose of appointing a trustee.
21. (1) The creditors qualifýed to vote may, at their fýrst cro.ýnmi~e
or any subsequent meeting by resolution, appoint a com- o ýnspec on.
mittee of inspection for the purpose of superintending the
administration of the bankrupt's property by the trustee.
(2) The committee of iýispection shall consist of not more
than fýve nor less than three persons, possessing one or
other of the follovving qualifýcations-
(a) that of being a  creditor or the holder of a general~

18 GAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. 1
power of attorney from a creditor, provided that
rno creditor and no holder ot a general proxy or
general power of attorney from a  creditor shal1
be qualifýed to act as a member of the committee
of inspection until the creditor has proved his
debt and the proof has been admitted; or
(b) that of being a person to whom a creditor intends to
giving a general proxy or general power of
attorney; provided that no such person shal1 be
qualifýed to act as a  member of the committee A,
of inspection until he holds such a  proxy or ..
power of attorney, and unill the creditor has
proved his debt and the proof has been admitted.
(3) The committee of inspection shal1 meet at such times
as they shal1 from time to time appoint and failing such
appointment, at least once a month ;  and the trustee or any
member of the committee may also call a meeting of the
committee as and when he thinks necessary.
(4) The committee may act by a majority of their
members present at a  meeting, bui shal1 not act unless a
majority of the committee are preseni at the meeting.
(5) Any member of the committee may resign his office by
notice in writing signed by him, and delivered to the
trustee.
.
(6) if a member of the committee becomes bankrupt or
compounds or arranges with his creditors, or is abseni from
fýve consecutive meetings of the committee, his office shal1
thereupon become vacant.
(7) Any member of the committee may be removed by an
ordinary resolution at any meeting of creditors of which
seven day's notice has been given, stating the object of the
meeting.
(8) On a  vacancy occurring in the office of a  member of
8the committee, the trustee shal1 forthwith summon a
meeting of creditors for the purpose of fýl1ing the vacancy
and the meeting may, by resolution, appoint another
creditor or other person eligible as above to fýll the vacancy.
(9) The continuing members of the committee, provided
there be not less than two such continuing members, may
act notwithstanding any vacancy in their body ;  and where
the number of members of the committee of inspection is
for the time being less than fýve, the creditors may increase
that number so that it does not exceed fýve.
--

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP.5. 19
(10) If there be no committee of inspection, any act or
thing or any direction or permission by this Law authorized
or required to be done or given by the committee may be
done or given by the Court on the application of the trustee.
22. (1) Where a debtor is adjudged bankrupt the Power to
creditors may, if they think fýt, at any time af ter the ~~rE~:oý::ý-
adjudication, by a majority in number and three-fourths scheme after
in value of all the creditors who have proved, resdIye to ~~fu~~~cy
accept a  proposal for a  composition in satisfaction of the tion.
debts due to them under the bankruptcy, or for a  scheme of
arrangement of the bankrupt's affairs; and thereupon the
same proceedings shall be taken and the same consequences
shall ensue as in the cage of a composition or scheme
accepted before adjudication.
(2) If the Court approves the composition or scheme it
may make an order annulling the bankruptcy and vesting
the property of the bankrupt in him or in such other person
as the Court may appoint, on such terms, and subject to
such conclitjang if  any, as the Court may declare.
(3) if default is  made in payment of any instalment due
in pursuance of the composition or scheme, or if  it  appears to
the Court that the composition or scheme cannot proceed
without injustice or undue delay, or that the approval of
the Court was obtained by fraud, the Court may, if  it  thinks
fýt, on application by any person interested, adjudge the
debtor bankrupt, and annul the composition or scheme,
but without prejudice to the validity of any sale, dispositian,
or payment duly made, or thing duly done, under or in
pursuance of the composition or scheme. Where a  debtor
is adjudged bankrupt under this subsection, all debts,
provable in other respects, which have been contracted
before the date of such adjudication shall be provable in
the bankruptcy.
Controlover Person and Property of Debtor.
23. (1) Every debtor against whom a  receiving order is Duties of
made shall, unless prevented by sickness or other su:fficent ~fs~~:e:; to
cause, attend the fýrst meeting of his creditors, and shall a.nd realiza-
submit to such examination and give such information as ;~o;eo:ýy.
the meeting may require.
(2) He shall give such inventory of his property, such list

20 CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
of his creditors and debtors, and of the debts due to and -
from them respectively, submit to such examination in
~respect of his property or his creditors, attend such other
meetings of his creditors, wait at such times on the offýcial
receiver, special manager, or trustee, execute such powers
of attorney, conveyances, deeds, and instruments and,
generally do all such acts and things in relation to his
property and the distribution of the proceeds amongst his
creditors as may be reasonably required by the offýcial
receiver, special manager, or trustee, or may be prescribed 8
by general rules, or be directed by the Court by any special
order or orders made in reference to any particular case,
or made on the occasion of any special application by the
offýcial receiver, special manager, trustee, or any creditor or
person interested.
(3) He shall, if  adjudged bankrupt, aid to the utmost of
his power, in the realization of his property and the distribu-
tion of the proceeds among his creditors.
(4) if  a debtor wilfully fai1s to perform the duties imposed
on him by this section or to deliver up possession of any part
of his property, which is divisible amongst his creditors
under this Law, and which is for the time being in his
possession or under his control, to the offýcial receiver or
to the trustee, or to any person authorized by the Court to
take possession of it, he shall, in addition to any other
punishment to which he may be subject, be guilty of a
contempt of Court, and may be punished accordingly.
~ft of d 24. (1) The Court may, by warrant addressed to any
c:~~ un er police offýcer or prescribed offýcer of the Court, cause a
cfcum- debtor to be arrested, and any books, papers, money, and
s ances. goods in his possession to be seized, and him and them to
be safely kept in such places and until such time as the a
Court may order under the following circumstances :- -
(a) if, af ter a bankruptcy notice has been issued under
this Law, or af ter presentation of a bankruptcy
petition by or against him, it appears to the
Court that there is probable reason for believing
that he has been guilty of any offence punishable
under this Law or that he has absconded or is
about to abscond with a view of avoiding
~ payment of the debt, in respect of which
bankruptcy notice was issued, or of avoiding
service of a  bankruptcy petition or of avoiding~,..'

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5., 21 i
.-
appearance to any such petition or of avoiding .
~examination in respect of his affairs, or of
otherwise avoiding, delaying or embarrassing
proceedings in bankruptcy against him ;
(b) if, af ter presentation of a bankruptcy petition by or
against him, it  appears to the Court that there is
probable cause for believing that he is about to
remove his goods with a  view of preventing or
delaying possession being taken of them by the
8 offýcial receiver or trustee, or that there is
probable ground for believing that he has
concealed or is about to conceal or destroy any
of his goods, or any books, documents, or
writings, which might be of use to his creditors
in the course of his bankruptcy;
..(c) if, af ter service of a  bankruptcy petition on him,
or af ter a receiving order is  made against him,
he removes any goods in his possession above
the value of fýve pounds without the leave of the
offýcial receiver or trustee;
(d) if, without good cause shown, he fails to attend any
examination ordered by the Court:
Provided that no arrest upon a bankruptcy notice shall be
valid and protected unless the debtor before or at the time of
his arrest is served with such bankruptcy notice.
(2) The Court may, at any time af ter the arresi of the
debtor order his release on his filmÝshing security to the
satisfaction of the Court not to quit the Colony without the
leave of the Court.
(3) No payment or composition made or security given
af ter arrest made under this section sha11 be exempt from
8 the provisions of this Law relating to fraudulent preferences.
25. Where a receiving order is made against a debtor, the Re-direc~on
Court on the application of the offýcial receiver or trustee, f::e~to:t~.
may from time to time order that for such time, not .
exceeding three months as the Court thinks fýt, post letters,
telegrams and other postal packets addressed to the debtor
at any place, or places mentioned in the order for re-
direction sha11 be re-directed, sent or delivered by the
Postmaster-General or the offýcers acting under him, to the
offýcial receivev or the trustee, or otherwise as the Court
directs, and the same sha11 be done accordingly. The
.

22 CAF. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
signature of the' officia! receiver or the trustee on any money
rorder payable to such debtor sha11 be a  sufficient acquittance
thereof.
InQ
duiryba.s 26. (1) The Court may, on the application of the official
to e tor s ..
ft..dhconduct, receýver or trustec, at any tIme a er a receývýng or er as
dealings and been made against a  debtor, summon before it  the debtor
property, or his wife, or any person known or suspected to have in his
possession any of the estate or effects belonging to the debtor
or supposed to be indebted to the debtor, or any person a
whom the Court may deem capable of giving information .
respecting the debtor, his dealings or property, and the
Court may require any such person to produce any
documents in his custody or power relating to the debtor,
his dealings or property.
(2) if  any person so summoned af ter having been tendered
a reasonable sum, refuses to come before the Court at the
time appointed, or refuses to produce any such document,
having no lawful impediment made known to the Court at
the time of its sitting and a!lowed by it, the Court may, by
warrant, cause him to be apprehended and brought up for
examination.
(3) The Court may examine on oath, either by word of
mouth or by written interrogatories, any person so brought
before it conceming the debtor, his dealings or property.
(4) if any person on examination before the Court admits
that he is indebted to the debtor, the Court may, on the
application of the official receiver or trustee, order him to
pay the officia! receiver or trustee, at such time and such
manner as the Court deems expedient, the amount-admitted,
or any part thereof, either in full discharge of the whole
amount in question or not, as the Court thinks fýt, with or
without costs of the examination.
(5) if any person on examination before the Court
.admits that he has in his possesion any property belonging
to the debtor, the Court may, on the application of the officia!
receiver or trustee, order him to deliver to the official
receiver or trustee such property, or any part thereof, at
such time, and in such manner, and on such terms as to the
Court may seem just.
(6) The Court may, if  it  thinks fýt, order that any person
who if in Cyprus would be liable to be brought before it
under this section sha!l be examined in any other place out
of Cyprus.

-BANKRUPTCY. [C AP. 5.~ ý
27. (1) A bankrupt may; at any time af ter be~ng adjudged ~;~:~~~of
bankrupt, apply to the Court for an order of dýscharge, and
the Court shall appoint a  day for hearing the application,
but the application sh all not be he ard until the public
examination of the bankrupt is concluded. The application
shall, except when the Court in accordance with rules under
this Law otherwise directs, be heard Ýn open Court.
(2) On the hearing of the application the Court shall
8' take into consideration areport .of t~e offi,cial receiver as to
the bankrupt's conduct and affaýrs (ýncludýng a  report as to
the bankrupt's conduct during the proceedings under his
bankruptcy), and may either grant or refuse an absolute
order of discharge, or suspend the operation of the order
for a  specified time, or grant an order of discharge subject
to any conditions with respect to any eamÝngs or Ýncome
which may afterwards become due to the bankrupt, or with
respect to his af ter-acquired property :
Provided that where the bankrupt has committed any
misdemeanour under this Law, or any enactment repealed
by this Law, or any other misdemeanour connected with his
bankruptcy or any felony connected with his bankruptcy, or
where in any case any of the facts hereinafter mentioned are
proved, the Court shall either-
(a) reflise the discharge ;  or
(b) suspend the discharge for such period as it deems
fit ~ or
(c) suspend the discharge until a  dividend of not less
than five hundred mils in the pound has been paid to
the creditors; or
(d) require the bankrupt as a  condition of his discharge
to consent to judgment being entered against
him by the official receiver or trustee for any
'8 balance or part of any balance of the debts provable
under the bankruptcy which is not satisfied at the
date of the discharge, such balance or part of any
balance of the debts to be paid out of the future
eamings or af ter-acquired property of the bankrupt
in such manýýer and subject to such conditions as the
Court may direct; but execution shall not be issued
on the judgment without leave of the Court, which
leave may be given on proof that the bankrupt has
since his discharge acquired property or income
available towards payment of his debts :

24C~. 5.]. B,ANKR(J~T~Y. 1
.-~ Provideð that; if; at any time aft{Jr the date of any order .
rnade underthis sedtion the bankrupt satisfies the;Collvt that
rthereis n9:reasonable probability of his beingin a position.to
compir wýth the tenns of such order, the'Cüurt may modýfy
the tenns of the order, ot of any substituted order, in such
manýýer and upon such conditions as it  may think fir:
(3) The facts hereinbefore r~ferred to 3:!e-:--
(a) that the bankrupt's assets are not of a value equal to
five hundredmils in the pound on the amount of his e
unsecured liabilities, unless he satisfies the Court
that the fact that the assets are not of a value equal
to five hundred mils in the pound on the amount of
his unsecured liabilities has arisen from cÝrcum-
,.. ,") stances foý: which he cannot justly be held respon-
sible;
(b) that the bankrupt has omitted to keep such books of
;ýccount as, are usuat and proper in the busin~ss
carried on by him and as sufficiently disclose his
business transactions and financial position within
the three years 'Ýmmediately preceding his bank-
ruptcy :
"
,., '(c) that 'the bankÝ-upt has continued to trade af ter knowing
himself to be insolvent ;
(d) that the ban~pt has contracted any debt provable
in the bankruptcy without having at the time of
contracting it  any reasonable or probable ground of
~ expe;ctatioÝl (proof whereof shalllie on him) of being
" ;ýble to pay it  ;
(e) that the bankrupt has failed to account satisfactorily
foi: any loss of assets or for any deficiency of assets
to meet his liabilities ;
(f) th~t the bankrupt has brought o~, or contribute.d to
.hýs bankruptcy by rash and hazardolis speculatýons,
or by unjustifiable extravagance in living, or by
gambling, or by culpable neglect of his business
affairs ;
(g) that the bankrtlpt has put any of his creditors to
unnecessary expense by a frivololis or vexatious
defence to any action properly brought against him ;
(h) that the bankrupt has brought on or contributed to
his bankruptcy by incurring unjustifiable expense
in bringing any frivololiS or \-exatious action ;
,
.-,#'f"t -

BANKRUP~CY. ICAP. 5. 25 i
-(i) that the bankrupt'has, within three months precedin.g- -
the date of ýpe rece.iving order, ,when unable to pay
rhis debts as they become due, given an undue
preference to any of his creditors ;
(j) that the bankrupt has, within three months precedin~
the date of the receiving order, incurred liabi,lities
with a view of making his assets equal to five hundred
mils in the p<:>und on the amount of his unsecured
liabilities ;
O (k) that the bankrupt. has on any previous occa~ion
-whether under thýs Law or any Law for the týme
being in force in Cyprus been adjudged bankrupt, or
made a composition or arrangement with his
creditors ; "
'(1) that the bankrupt has been guilty of any fraud or
fraudulent breach of trust. .
,   (4) With a  view to removin.g- any statutory disqualification
<>n account of bankruptcy which is removed if the bankrupt
<>btains from the Court his discharge with a certificate to the
-effect that the bankruptcy was caused by misfortune without
any misconduct on his part, the Court may, if it  thinks fit,
grant such a certificate, but a refusal to grant such a certificate
shall be subject to appeal. ~
(5) For the purposes of this section a bankrupt's assets shall
De deemed of a value equal to five hundred mil s in the pound
-on the amount of his unsecured liabilities when the Couri is
satisfied that the property of the bankrupt has realized, or is
likely to realize, or with due care in realizatiön might have
realized, an amount equal to five hundred mils in the pound oýý
his unsecured liabilities, and a  report by the official receiver
'or the trustee shall be prima facie evidence of the amount of
'such liabilities.
(6) For the purposes of this section the report of the officia1
receiver shall be prima facie evidence of the statements therein
'contained.
(7) Notice of the appointment by the Court of the day for
nearin.g- the application for dischar.g-e shall be published in the
prescribed manner, and sent fourteen days at least before the
,day so appointed to each creditor whö has proved, and the
Court may hear the official receiver and the trustee, and may
also he ar any creditor. At the hearing the Court may put
:such questions ,00 the debtor and receive such evidence as it
-may think fit.
~ ~,ccc

26 CAP. 5.J BA1VKRUPTCY. 1
i
(8) The powers of suspending and of attacbing conditions -
to a bankrupt's discharge may be exercised coocmrently.
~Procý;dure
f28. In the event of a  bankrupt failing to appfy for his:
on faýlure o. bankrupt to dýscharge as ýn the last precedýng sectýon hereof mentýoned
d~~a~~~. the official receiver shall, as soon as may be af ter the granting
of the trustee's release by the Court but not fater rhan two
years af ter the close of the public examination if  the trustee-
has not been released by that time, appIy to the Court for
the considerati°ý.ý by them of such bankrupt's discharge.. ~he- O .
Court may requýre the bankrupt to be present for examýnatýon
at any hearing convened in pursuance of the provisions of this
section, and may make such order as seems just having regard
to all the cÝrcumstances.
~uties ol
d29. A discharged bankrupt shaII, notwithstandÝng his dis-
dýscharge
h.h.
h..
hbankrupt. C arge, gýve suc assýstance as t  e trustee may requIre ýn t  e
realization and distribution of such of his property as is vested
in the trustee, and if  he faiIs to do so he shaIl be guilty of a
contempt of Court ;  and the Court may, if  it  thinks fit, revoke
his discharge, but without prejudice to the validity of any sale,
disposition, or payment duty made or thing duly done sub-
sequent to the discharge, but before Ýts revocation.
Effect of 30. (1) An order of discharge shaIl not reIease the bankrupt
df~eha~~e. from any debt on a  recognizance nar from any fine or debt
with which the bankrupt may be chargeabIe at the suÝt of the
Crown (or of any person) for any offence against any Law, or
on a  baiI bond entered info for the appearance of any person
prosecuted for any offence; and he shaII not be discharged
from such excepted debts unless the Governor certify in
writing under the han d of the Administrative Secretary his
consent to his being discharged therefrom.
(2) An order of dÝscharg-e shaII not release the bankrupt e
from any debt or Iiability incurred by means of any fraud or
fraudulent breach of trust to which he was a party, nor from
any debt or Iiability whereof he has obtaÝned forbearance by
any fraud to which he was a party .
(3) An order of discharge shaII not reIease any person who
at the date of the receiving order was a  partner or co-trustce
with the bankrupt or was jointly bound or had any joint con-
tract wÝth him, 01 any person who was surety or in the nature
of a surety for him.
-~ -

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 27 i
-
-
(4) An order of discharge shall Telcage the bankrupt from -
r.all other debts provable in bankruptcy.
(5) An order of discharge shall be conclusive evidence of
the bankruptcy and of the validity of the proceedings
therein, and in any proceedings that may be instituted
against a bankrupt who has obtained an order of discharge
in respect of any debt from which he is released by the order,
the bankrupt may plead that the cause of action occurred
before his discharge.
8 31. (1) Where in the apiýýion of the Court a debtor ought ~ow:ýr;or
not to have been adjudged bankrupt, or where it  is proved a~~ul o
to the satis~ac~ion of the Court that the debts of ~he ?ank- f~j~~c:Ý~on
rupt are paýd ýn full, the Court may, on the appIicatýon of cases.
any person interested, by order annul the adjudication.
(2) Where an adjudication is annulled under this section,
all sales and dispositions of property and payments duly
made, and all acts theretofore done, by the official receiver,
trustec, or other person acting under theirauthority, or by the
Court, shall be valid, but the property of the debtor who
was adjudged bankrupt shaR vest in such person as the
Court may appoint, or, in default of any such appointment,
revert to the debtor for all his estate or interest therein on
such terms and subject to such conditions, if  any, as the
Court may declare by order.
(3) Notice of the order annu1ling an adjudication shall be
forthwith gazetted and published in two local papers one of
which is published in the Turkish and the other in the Greek
language.
(4) For the purposes of this section, any debt disputed
by a debtor shall be considered as paid in full if  the debtor
enters into a bond, in such sum and with such sureties as the
..Court approves, to pay the amatint to be recovered in any
..proceeding for the recovery of or conceming the debt, with
costs, and any debt due to a  creditor who cannot be fonnd
or cannot be identifýed shall be considered as paid in full if
paid into Court.
c. f

2Þ ÇAP. 5.] B:ANKRUPTCY. i
-'---e_o' '. ~
.PART ll. -
DýSQUALIFICATIONS OF BANKRUPT.
rI?isqualifica- 32. (1) Where a  debtor is adjudged bankrupt, he shall,
~l~~c~arged subject to the provisions of this Law, be disqualified for
bankrupt. being elected or holding or exercising the office of:-
(a) member of Legislative Council;
(b) mayor or member of a Municipal Council;
(c) member of a  District Council (Medjlis Idare) ; At
(d) mukhtar. '.ý
(2) The disqualifications to which a  bankrupt is subject
under this section shall be removed and cease if  and when:-
(a) the adjudication in bankruptcy is annulled; or
(b) he obtains from the Court his discharge with a
certificate to the effect that his bankruptcy was
caused by misfortune without any misconduct
on his part.
The Court may grant or withhold such certificate as it
thinks fit, but any refusal of such certificate shall be subject
to appeal.
~~~~ed b 33. if the debtor is a~jud~ed bank.rupt w~ilst be~ng
bankruptc~ elected member of the Legýslatýve Councýl or whilst holdýng
~~hol~er the office of mayor or member of a  Municipal Council or
ereo .whilst being a  member of a  District Council (Medjlis Idare)
or whilst holding the office of mukhtar, his seat. or office
shall thereupon become vacant.
PART III.
ADMINISTRATION OF PROPERTY.
Provable Debts. /8
~e~c~ftion 34. (1) Demands in the nature of unliquidated damages
~ro:ab~ in arising otherwise than by reason of a  contract, promise, or
bankruptcy. breach oÝ trust shall not be provable in bankruptcy.
(2) A person having notice of any act of bankruptcy
available against the debtor shall not prove under the order
for any debt or liability contracted by the debtor sub-
sequently to the date of his so having notice.
(3) Save as aforesaid, all debts and liabilities, present or
future, certain or contingent, to which the debtor is subject

i
BANKRUPTCY. [CAP.. 5. 29 ~
at the date of the receiving order, or to which he may become -
r~ubject before his discharge by reas?n. of any obligation
ýncurred before the date ot the receývýng order, shall be
deemed to be debts provable in bankruptcy.
(4) An estimate shallbe made by the trustee of the value
of any debt or liability provable as aforesaid, which by
reason of its being subject to any contingency, or for any
other reason does not bear a  certain value.
..(5) Any person aggrieved by any estimate made by the
..trustee as aforesaid may appeal to the Court.
(6) If, in the opinion of the Court, the value of the debt
or liability is incapable of being fairly estimated, the Court
may make an order to that effect, and thereupon the debt or
liability shall for the purposes of this Law, be deemed to be
a  debt not provable in bankruptcy.
(7) If, in the opinion of the Court, the value of the debt or
liability is  capable of being fairly estimated, the Court may
direct the value to be assessed before the Court itself, and
may give all necessary directions for this purpose, and the
amount of the value when assessed shall be deemed to be a
debt provable in bankruptcy.
(8) "Liability" shall, for the purposes of this Law,
include-
(a) any compensation for work or labour done;
(b) any obligation or PQssibility of an obligation to pay
money or money's worth on the breach of any
expressed or implied covenant, contract, agree-
ment, or undertaking, whether the breach does
or does not occur, or is  or is not likel y to occur or
capable of occurring, before the discharge of the
debtor;
(c) generally, any expressed or implied engagement,
8 agreement, or undertaking, to pay, or capable of
resulting in the payment of money or money's
worth; whether the payment is, as respects
amount, fýxed oý unliquidated; as respects time,
present or future, certain or dependent on any
one contingençy or on two or more contingencies;
as to mode of valuation, capable of being
ascertained by fýxed rules or as matterof opinion.
35. Where there have been mutual credits, mutual debts, Mu:aý d
or other mutual dealings between a  debtor against whom ~~~ o~.an
f  (2)
..,-,"-,-"~

30 CAP. 5.] l3ANKRUPTCY. 1
-~
a  receiving order shall be made under this Law, and any .
other person proving or claiming to prove a debt under the
rreceiving order, an account shall be taken of what is due
from the one party.to the other in respect of such mutual
dealings, and the sum due from the one party shall be set
off against any sum due from the other party, and the
balance of the account, and no more, shall be claimed or
paid on either side respectively; but a person shall not be
entitled under this section to claim the benefýt of any set off
against the property of a  debtor in any cage where he had
8at the time of giving credit to the debtor, notice of an act of
bankruptcy committed by the debtor, and available against
him.
Appropriation of Assets.
~;Y:fi~t 36. (1) .The ass~ts re~a~ing af ter payment of the actual
mÝEary expenses Jncurred ýn realýzýng any of the assets of the debtor
expenses. shall, subject to any order of the Court, be liable to the
following payments, which shall be made in the following .
order of priority, namely-
(a) the actual expenses incurred by the offýcial receiver
in protecting the property or assets of the debtor
or any part thereof and any expenses or outlay
incurred by him or by his authority in carrying
on the business of the debtor;
(b) the fees, percent ages ,  and charges payable to, or
costs, charges, and expenses incurred or autho-
rized by the offýcial receiver;
(c) the remuneration of the special manager, if  any; and
(d) thetaxed costs of the petitioning creditor so far as
the same may not have been disallowed by the
Court.
(2) Whenever the Court is satisfýed that property of a
debtor in respect of whose estate a receiving order has been a
made has been preserved for the benefýt of the creditors by .
means of legal proceedings brought by a creditor against the
debtor without notice of any available act of bankruptcy
committed by the debtor, the Court may, in its discretion,
order the payment of the costs of such legal proceedings
or any part of them out of the estate with the same priority
as to payment as is herein provided in respectof the taxed
costs of the petitioner.
Rules a: 37. With respect to the mode of proving debts, the right of
: a~~~s. proofs by secured and other creditors, the admission and

'1..."i;'~'i"'!"~-~
Ic :~;:".,"',".;.,.,"; ,-' ", ,c';!;",
BANKRUPTCY. [GAP. 5. 31 -
~
rejection of proofs, and the othermatters referred to in the -
Second Schedule, the rulesin thatSchedule shall be observed. ~~~~~~le.
r38. (1) In the distribution of the property of a  bankrupt ~Ority of
there shall be paid in priority to allother debts but af ter e ts.
payment of the preliminary expenses in section 36 herein- i
before mentioned-
(a) all Govemment taxes and duties, Municipal or
Ý-. village rates due from the bankrupt at the date
..of the receiving order and having fýrst become
due and payable within twelve months next
before that time;
(b) all wages or salary of any clerk or servant, whether
or not eamed wholly or in part by way of com-
mission, in respect of services rendered to the
bankrupt during the four months next preceding
the date of the receiving order, not exceeding
fýfty pounds;
(c) all wagesof any labourer or workman not exceeding
twenty-fýve pounds, whether payable for time or
for piecework, in respect of .services rendered to
the bankrupt during two months before the date
of the receiving order;
(d) such part of any premium paid by or on behalf of
any apprentice under service to the bankrupt as
the Court may order;
(e) all amounts, not exceeding in any individual cage
one hundred pounds, due in respect of compen-
sation under the Workmen's Compensation Law, Cap.188.
the liability wherefore accrued before the date of
the receiving order, subject nevertheless to the
provisions of section 31 of that Law;
(j) all rent accrued due to the landlord during the four
18 .months next preceding the date of the receiving
order.
(2) The foregoing debts shall rank equally between them-
selves and shall be paid in full, unless the property of the
bankrupt is insuffýcient to meet them, in which cage they
shall abate in equal proportions between themselves.
(3) Subject to the retention of such sums as may be
necessary for the costs of administration or otherwise, the
foregoing debts shall be discharged forthwith so far as the
property-of the debtor, is suffýcient to meet them.

32 GAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY, ~" 1
(4) The joint estate of partners shall be appIicable in the
rfýr.st.instance in -payment of their joint debts, and the
-?eparate ~state of each par~ner shall be appIicable in the ?rst
ýnstance ýn payment of hýs þeparate debts. if there ýs a
surplus of the separate estates it  shall be dealt with as part of
the joint estate. if there is a  surplus of the joint estate it
shall be dealt with as part of the respective separate estates !
in proportion to the right and interest of each partner in the
joint estate. ;
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Law, all debts proved 8
in the bankruptcy shall be paid pari passu.
(6) if there is any surplus af ter payment of the debts it
shall be appIied in payment of interest from the date of the
receiving order at the rate of nine pounds per centum per
annum on all debts proved in the bankruptcy.
(7) Nothing in this section shall alter the effect of section 7
Cap. ll6. of the Partnership and Business N ames Law, or the order of
the liquidation of the debts of a  deceased person under the
Cap. l89. provisions of the Administration of Estates Law.
Postpo~e- 39. (1) Where a married woman has been adjudged
~::a~d's bankrupt, her husband shall not be entitled to claim any
af<;Ý wife's dividend as a creditor in respect of any money or other
c aýms. estate lent or entrusted by him to his wife for the purposes
of her trade or business until all claims of the other creditors
of his wife for valuable consideration in money or money's
worth have been satisfýed.
(2) Where the husband of a  married woman has been
adjudged bankrupt, any money or other estate of such
woman lent or entrusted by her to her husband for the
purpose of any trade or business carried on by him or other-
wise, shall be treated as assets of his estate, and the wife
shall not be entitled to claim any dividend as a  creditor in
respect of any such money or other estate until all claims of
the other creditors of her husband for valuable consideration 8
in money or money's worth have been satisfýed.
(3) The provisions of thissection shall not apply to claims
in respect of any money or other estate lent or entrusted by
a husband to his wife or by a wife to her husband before the
commencement of this Law.
Property Available for Payment of Debts.
Relation
4OThbkfdbhhhback of .e an ruptcy o a e  tor, w et er t  e same takes
t~ustee's place on the debtor's own petition or upon that of a  creditor
týtle.
-~--

BANKR1ÝPTCY. [CAP. 5. 33 i
.
-
or creditors, shall be deemed to have relation back to, and to .
commence at, the time of the act of bankrnptcy being
~committed on which a receiving order is  made against him,
or, if  the bankrupt is  proved to have committed more acts
of bankruptcy than one, to have relation back to, and to
commence at, the time of the fýrst of the acts of bankruptcy
proved to have been committed by the bankrupt within
three months next preceding the date of the presentation of
the bankruptcy petition; but no bankruptcy petition,
8receiving order, or adjlidication shall b~ rendered invalid by
reason of any act of bankruptcy antenor to the debt of the
petitioning creditor,
41. The property of the bankrupt divisible among his Description,
d' .
h.Lfdhfhof bankrupt s
cre ýtors ýn t  ýs aw re erre to as t  e  property O t  e  property
bankrupt   shall comprise the followin
gParticulars:- divisible
, amongbt
(a) all such property as may belong to or be vested in creditors.
the bankrupt at the commencement of the
bankruptcy or may be acquired by or devolveon
him before his discharge;
(b) the capacity to exercise and to take proceedings for
exercising all such powers in and over or in
respect of property as might have been exercised
by the bankrupt for his own benefýt at the
commencement of his bankruptey or before his
discharge;
(c) all goods being, at the commencement of the
bankruptcy, in the possession, order, or dis-
position of the bankrupt, in his trade or business,
by the consent and permission of the true owner,
under such circumstances that he is the reputed
owner thereof: Provided that things in action
other than debts due or growing due to the
..bankrupt in the course of his trade or business
.shall not be deemed goods within the meaning of
this section,
42. The following shall not form part of the bankrupt's ~o.P~r;:y not/
property divisible among his creditors, namely:- a:~~gs~
creditors.
(a) property held by the bankrupt on trust for any
other person;
(b) aýý property as would be exempt from execution
under any Law for the tin:e being in force in
Cyprus, :
---~

34 CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
Pr~visions d 43. (1) Where a second or subsequent receiving order is
r:n~:~~~~y made against a bankrupt, or where an order is made for the
a~
td
hdealings administration in bankruptcy of the estate of a  deceased
wl persons .
adjudged bankrupt, then for the purposes of any proceedings con-
bankrupts. sequent upon any such order, the trustee in the last preced-
ing bankruptcy shall be deemed to be a creditor in respect of
any unsatisfýed balance of the debts provable against the
property of the bankrupt in that bankruptcy.
(2) In the event of a second or subsequent receiving order a
made against a bankrupt beingfollowed by an order adjudg- -
ing him bankrupt, or in the event of an order being made for
the administration in bankruptcy of the estate of a deceased
bankrupt, any property acquired by him since he was last
adjudged bankrupt~ which at the date when the subsequent
petition was presented had not been distributed amongst the
creditors in such last preceding bankruptcy, shall (subject to
any disposition thereof made by the offýcial receiver or
trustee in that bankruptcy, without knowledge of the pre-
sentation of the subsequent petition, and subject to the pro-
visions of subsection (5) and subsection (6) of this section)
vest in the trustee in the subsequent bankruptcy or adminis-
tration in bankruptcy as the case may be.
(3) Where the trustee in any bankruptcy receives notice of
a subsequent petition in bankruptcy against the bankrupt or
af ter his decease of a petition for the administration of his
estate in bankruptcy, the trustee shall hold any property
then in his possession which has been acquired by the bank-
rupt since he was adjudged bankrupt until the subsequent
petition has been disposed of, and, if on the subsequent
petition an order of adjudication or an order for the adminis-
tration of the estate in bankruptcy is made, he shall transfer
all such propertY or the proceeds thereof (after deducting his
costs and expenses) to the trustee in the subsequent bank-
ruptcy or administration in bankruptcy, as the case may be. 8
(4) A payment of money or delivery of property to a
person subseq l1ently adjudged bankrupt, or to a person
claiming by assignment from him, shaJl, notwithstanding
anything in this Law, be a  good discharge to the person
paying the money or delivering the property, if  the payment
or delivery is made before the actual date on which the
receiving order is  made and without notice of the presen-
tation of a bankruptcy petition and is either pursuant to the
ordinary course of business or otherwise bona fide.

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 35 i
~
(5) All transactions by a bankrupt with any person .
dealing with him bond fide and for value, in respect of
~property, whether movable or immovable, acquired by the
ban~rupt aft~r the adj udication, sha~, if  cO;mpleted before
any ýnterventýon by the trustee, be valýd agaýnst the trustee,
and any estate or interest in such property which by virtue
of this Law is vested in the trustee-sha11 determine and pass
in such manýýer and to such extent as may be required for
giving effect to any such transaction.
8 For the purpose of this subsection, the receipt of any
money, security, or negotiable instrument, from, or by the
order or direction of, a  bankrupt by his banker, and any
payment and any delivery of any security or negotiable
instrument made to, or by the order or direction of, a
bankrupt by his banker, shal1 be deemed to be a transaction
by the bankrupt with such bankeT dealing with him for
value.
(6) Where a bankeT has ascertained that a person having
an account with him is an undischarged bankrupt, then,
unless the bankeT is satisfý~d that the account is on behalf of
some other person, it  shall be his duty forthwith to inform
the trustee in the bankruptcy or the official receýver of the
existence of the account, and thereafter he shal1 not make
any payments out of the account, except under an order of
the Court or in accordance with instructions from the
trustee in the bankruptcy, unless by the expiration ot one
month from the date of giving the information no instruc-
tions have been received from the trustee.
Effect of Bankruptcy on Antecedent Transactions.
-44. (1) Where a creditor has issued execution against the Res~riction
goods or immovable property of a debtor, or has attached ~~eý;;i~~~: of
any debt due to him, he sha11 not be entitled to retain the under.
A benefýt of the execution or attachment against the trustee in ~~e~~~~~-
..bankruptcy of the debtor, unless he has completed the ment.
execution or attachment before the date of the receiving
order, and before notice of the presentation of any bank-
ruptcy petition by or against the debtor, or of the commission
of any available act of bankruptcy by the debtor.
(2) For the purposes of this Law, an execution or attach-
ment shall be deemed to be completed-
(a) in the case of goods, chattels, or other movable
property in the possession of the debtor or of
nego.tiable instruments., ~seizure and sale;
--

36 CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. .i
.
(b) in the case of go?ds, chattels, <?r ot~er mov8;ble
rproperty to whých the debtor ýs entýtled subject
to alien or right of some person to the immediate
possession thereof, by attachment by prohibition
order and sale;
.(c) in the case of lands, houses or other immovable
property or any interest therein by attachment
and due registration thereofat the Land Registry
Office;'
(d) in the case of an attachment of a  debt notbeing a 8
negotiable instromeýýt, by receipt of the debt.;
(e) in the case of shares in any public company or cor-
poration, by attachment by prohibition order;
(i) in the case of property in the custody or uncler the
control of any public officer in his official capacity
or in Court, by attachment by prohibition order
duly obtained and served.
(3) An execution levied by seizure and sale on the goods,
chattels or other movable property of a debtor is not
invalid by reason only of its being an act of bankruptcy, and
a person who purchases the goods, chattels or other movable
property under a sale by the sheriff shall, in all cases., acquire
a good title to them against the trustee in bankruptcy.
~ut~~ of 45. (1) Where any goods of a  debtor are taken in execu-
~oe;~OdaSs tion and before the sale thereof, or the completion of the
takenti? execution by the receipt or recovery of the full amount of the
execu ýan. levy, notice is served on the sheriff that a receiving order has
been made against the debtor, the sheriff shall, on request,
deliver the goods and any money seized or received in part
satisfaction of the execution to the official receiver, but the
costs of the execution shall be a  fýrst charge on the goods or
money so delivered, and the official receiver or trustee may
sell the goods or an adequate part thereoi, for the purpose of
satisfying the charge. 8
(2) Where under an execution in respect of a judgment for
a  sum exceeding twenty polinds, the goods of a  debtor are
sold or money is paid in order to avoid sale, the sheriff shall
deduct his costs of the execution from the proceeds of sale or
the money paid, and retain the balance for fourteen days,
and if within that time notice is served on him of a  bank-
ruptcy petition having been presented by or against the
debtor, and a  receiving order is made against the debtor
thereon, or on any other petitionof which the sheriff has
notice, the sheriffshall paythe balance to the official receiver
~

BANKRU:CY. [CAP.5. 37 i
~
or to the tnýstee, as the case may be, who shall be entitIed to .
retain the same as against the execution creditor.
~46. (1) Any settlement of property, not being a  settIe- ~voi~ce
ment made before and in consideration of marriage, or made ~et~l~m:~ts.
in favour of a purchaser or incumbrancer in good faith and
for valuable consideration,or a settIement made on or for the
wife orohildren of the settlor of property which has accnýed
to the settlor af ter marriage in right of his wife, shall, if  the
8 settlor becomes banknýpt within two years af ter the date of
the settlement, be void against the tnýsteein the banknýptcy,
and sha1l, if the settlor becomeþ banknýpt at any subsequent
time within ten years af ter the dat~ of the settIement, be
void against the tnýstee in the banknýptcy, unless the parties
claiming under the settIement can prove that the settIor was,
at the time of making the settIement, able to payall his debts
without the aid of the property comprised in the settlement
and that the interest of the settlor in such property passed to
the tnýstee of such settlement on the execution thereof.
(2) Any covenant or coIÝtract made by any person (herein-
af ter caUed the settlor) in consideration of his or her
marriage, either for the future payment of money for the
benefýt of the settlor's wife or husband or children, or for the
future settIement on or for the settlor's wife or husband or
children, of property, wherein the settIor had not at the date
of the marriage any estate or interest, whether vested or con-
tingent, in possession or remainder, and not being money or
property in right of the settIor's wife or husband, shall, if
the settIor is adjudged banknýpt and the covenant or con-
tract has not been executed at the date of the commencement
of his bankruptcy, be void against the tnýstee in the bank-
nýptcy except so far as it  enables the persons entitled under
the covenant or contract to claim for dividend in the settIor's
bankruptcy under or in respect of the "covenant or contract,
8 bu~ any such claim to diyidend sha1l be postpo~ed u~til ~ll
claýms of the other credýtors for valuable consýderatýon ýn
money or money's worth have been satisfýed.
(3) Any payment of money (not being payment of
premiums on a  policy of life assurance) or any transfer of
property made by the settIor in pursuance of such a covenant
or contract as aforesaid shall be void against the tnýstee in
the settIor's banknýptcy, unless the persons to whom the
payment or transfer was made prove either-
(a) that the payment or transfer was m~de more than

38 CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY, i
.
two years before the date of the commencement
rof the bankruptcy; or
(b) that at the date of the payment or transfer the
settlor was able to payallhis debts without the
aid of the money so paid or the property so
transferred; or
(c) that the payment or transfer was made in pursuance
of a covenant or contract to pay or transfer
money or property expected to come to the
.settlor from or on the death of a particularperson 8
named in the covenant or contract andwasmade
within three months af ter the money or property
came into the possession or under the control of
the settlor,
but, in the event of any such paymeDt or transfer being
declared void, the persons to whom it was made shall be
entitled to claim for dividend under or in respect of the
covenant or contract in Iike manýýer as if it had not been
executed at the commencement of the bankruptcy,
(4) "SettIement" shall, for the purpose of this section,
incI~de any conveyance or transfer of property~
Avoidance 47. (1) Every conveyance or transfer of property, or
of preferen-
hthdtdbl't'
ces in certain C arge ereon ma e, every paymen ma e, every o ýga ton
cases. incurred and every judiciaI proceeding taken or suffered by
any person unable to pay his debts as they become due from
his own money in fa your of any creditor, or of any person in
trust for any creditor, with a  view of giving such creditor a
preference over the other creditors, shall, if the person
making, taking, paying, or suffering the same, is adjudged
bankrupt on a  bankruptcy petition presented within three
months af ter the date of making, taking, paying, or suffering
the same, be deemed fraudulent and void as agajnst the
trustee in the bankruptcy,
(2) This section shall not affect the rights of any person 8
making title in good faith and for valuable consideration
through or under a  creditor of the bankrupt.
Protection 48. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this Law with
~:a~:~C:s respect to the effect of bankruptcy on an execution or attach-
wit~out meDt, and with respect to the avoidance of certain settle-
notýce. ments, assignments and preferences, nothing in this Law
shall invalidate in the case of a bankruptcy:-
(a) any paymeDt .by the bankrupt to any of his
creditors; _:.: ..:. ---: :- .-
--

BANKRU~CY. [CAP. 5. 39 i
~
(b) any payment or dellvery to the bankrupt; -
(c) any conveyance or assignment by the bankrupt for
~valuable consideration;
(d) any contract, dealing, or trans.actio~ by or with the
bankrupt for valuable consýderatýon:
Provided that both the following conditions are complied
with, namely- .
(a) that the payment, delivery, conveyance, assign-
..ment, contract, dealing, or transaction as the
..cage may be, takes place before the date of the
receiving order; and
(b) that the person (other than the debtor) to, by or
with whom the payment, delivery, conveyance,
assignment, contract, dealing or transaction was
made, exeouted, or entered into, has not at the
time of the payment, delivery, conveyance,
assignment, contract, dealing or transaction,
notice of any available act of bankruptcy
committed by the bankrupt before that time.
Realization of Property.
49. (1) Immediately on a debtor being adjudged bank- Vesting and
t  thrtf  thbkhII.htransfer of
rup, e prope y o e an rupt s  a vest ýn t  e trUStce. property.
Until a trustee is appointed the official receiver shalJ be the
trustee for the purposes of this section.
(2) On the appointment of a  trustee the property shall
forthwith pass to and vest in the trustee appointed.
(3) The property of the bankrupt sha11 pass from the
trustee, including under that term the official receiver when
he fi11s the office of trustee for the time being during his
continüance in office, without any conveyance, assignment,
or transfer whatever.
8 50. (1) The trustee sha11, as soon as may be, take posses- Possession
sion of the deeds, books, and documents of the bankrupt, ~~ ~~~~:~y
and allother parts of his property capable of manual .
delivery .
(2) The trustee sha11, in relation to and for the purpose of
acquiring or retaining possession of the property of the .
bankrupt, be in the same position as if  he were a  receiver of
the property appointed by the Court, and the Court may,
on his application, enforce such acquisition or retention
accordingir.

40 CAP. 5.] HA~RUPTCY. i
(3) Where any part of the property of the bankrupt con-
rsistsof stock, shares in ships, shares, or any other property
transferable in the books of any company, office, or person,
the trustee may exercise the right to transfer the property to
the same extent as the bankrupt might have exercised it
if  he had not become bankrupt.
(4) Where any part of the property of the bankrupt con-
sists ot things in action, such things shal1 be deemed to have
been duly assigned to the trustee.
(5) Any treasurer or other officer, or any banker, attorney, 8
or agent of a bankrupt, shal1 payand deliver to the trustee
all money and securities in his possession or power, as such
officer, banker, attorney, or agent, which he is not by law
entitled to retain as against the bankrupt or the trustee. If
he does not he shall be guilty of a contempt of Court, and may
be punished accordingIyon the application' of the trustee.
~;i:~:e 51. Any person acting under warrant of the Court may
property of seize any part of the property of a bankrupt, or of a  debtor
bankrupt. against whom a receiving order has been made. in the ,
custody or possession of the bankrupt or the debtor. or of any
other person, and with a view to such seizure may break open
any house, buildÝýýg, or room of the bankrupt or the debtor
where the bankrupt or the debtor is supposed to be, or any
bui1ding or receptacle of the bankrupt or the debtor where
any of his property is  supposed to be; and where the Court
is  satisfýed that there is reason to believe that property of a
bankrupt or a  debtor against whom a  receiving order has
been made is  concealed in a house or place not belonging to
him, the Court may, if  it  thinks fýt, grant a  search warrant
to any constable or offýcer of the Col1rt, who may execute it
according to its tenor.
A;ppropria- 52. (1) Where a  bankrupt is an offýcer or clerk employed
;~~i~~ of or engaged in the civil service of the Government, the 8
pay or trustees shal1 receive for distribution among the creditors so
~~~~Jo:. much ot the bankrupt's pay or salary as the Court, on the
application of the trustee, with the consent of the chief
offýcer of the Department under which the pay or salary is
enjoyed, may direct.
(2) Where a  bankrupt is in receipt of a  salary or income
other than as aforesaid, or is entitled to any half-pay, or
pension, or to any compensation granted by the Department
of the Accountant-General, the Court, on the application of
the trustee, shall from time to time make such, order as it

BANK=CY, [CAP.5. -41 i
-
thinks just for the paymentof the salary, income, half-pay, -
~pension or compensatjon, or of any part thereof, to the
trustee, to be applied by him in such manýýer as the Court
may direct,
53,. (1) Where any part of the ,property of the bankrupt ~i~~:~e:
consýsts of land of any tenure wýth onerous covenants, of property.
shares or stock in companies, of unprofitable contracts, or of
any other property that is unsaleable, or not readily saleable
a by reason of its binding the possessor thereof to the perfor-
., mance of any onerous act, or to the payment of any sum of
money, the trustee, notwithstanding that he has endea-
voured to sell or has taken possession of the property, or
exercised any act of ownership in relation thereto, bui
subject to the provisions ot this section, may, by writing
signed by him, at any time within twelve months af ter the
first appointment of a trustee, disclaim the property:
Provided that where any such property shall not have
come to the knowledge of the trustee within one month af ter
such appointment, he may disclaim such property at any
time within twelve months af ter he first became aware
thereof or such extended period as ma y be a1lowed by the
Court,
(2) The disclaimer shall operate to determine, as from the
date of disclaimer, the rights, interesis, and liabilities of the
bankrupt and his property in or in respect of the property
disclaimed, and shall also discharge the trustee from all
personal liability in respect of the property disclaimed, as
from the date when the property vested in him, bui sha1l not,
except so far as is necessary for the purpose of releasing the
bankrupt and his property and the trustee from liability,
affect the rights or liabilities of any other person,
(3) A trustee shall notbe entitled to disclaÝm a lease with-
8 out the leave of the Court, except in any cases which may be
prescribed by general rules, and the Court may, before or on
granting such leave, require such notices to be given to
persons interested, and impose such terms as a condition of
granting leave, and make such orders with respect to fixtures,
tenant's imptovefnents, and other matters arising out of the
t,enancy as the Court thinks just,
'(4) The trustee shaU not be entitled to disclaÝm any
property in pursuance of this section in any case where an
application in writing has been made to the trustee by any

42 GAP. 5.] BA::'PTCY. -i
c
person interested in the property requiring him to decide -
whether he will disclaim or not, and the trustee has for a
~period of twenty-eight days af ter the receipt of the applica-
tion, or such extended period as may be allowed by the
Court, declined or neglected to give notice whethet he
disclaims the property or not; and, in the case of a contract,
if  the trustee, af ter such application as aforesaid, does not
within the said period or extended period disclaim the
contract, he shall be deemed to have adopted it.
.(5) Th,e Court may, on th~ application of any perso? who 8
ýs, as agaýnst the trustee, entýtled to the benefýt or subject to
the burden of a contract made with the bankrupt, make an
order rescinding the contract on such terms as to payment
by or to either party of damages for the non-performance of
the contract, or otherwise, as to the Court may seem equi-
table, and any damages payable under the order to any such'
person may be proved by him as a  debt under the bank-
ruptcy.
(6) The Court. may, on application by any person either
claiming any interest in any disclaimed property, or under
any liability not discharged by this Law in respect of any
disclaimed property, and on hearing such persons as it thinks
fýt, make an order for the vesting of the property in or deli-
very thereof to any person entitled thereto, or to whom it
may seem just that the same should be delivered by way of
compensation for such liability as aforesaid, or a trustee for
him, and on such terms as the Court thinks just; and on any
such vesting order being made, the property comprised
therein shall vest accordingly in the person therein named in
that behalf without any conveyance or assignment for the
purpose:
Provided always, where the property disclaimed is of a
leasehold nature, the Court shall not make a vesting order Ýn
favour of any person claiming under the. bankrupt, whether a
as under lessee or as mortgagee by demýse except upon the ..
terms of making that person-
(a) subject to the same liabilities and obligations as the
bankrupt was subject to under the lease in
respect of the property at the date when the
bankruptcy petition was fýled; or
(b) if the Court thinks fýt, subject only to the same
liabilities and obligations as if  the lease had been
assigned to that person at that date;
and in either event (if the case so requires) as if the lease had

-BANKRUPTCY. [CAP.5. 43 i
-
comprised only the property comprised in the vesting order; =
and any mortgagee or under-Iessee declining to accept a .
~vesting order upon such terms shall be excluded from all
interest in and security upon the property, and if  there is no
person claiming under the bankrupt who is willing to accept
an order upon such terms, the Court shall have power to
vest the bankrupt's estate and interest in the property in
any person liable either personally or in a  representa tive
character, and either alone or joinlly with the bankrupt to
perform the lessee's covenants in such lease, freed and dis-
Ý- charged from all estates, incumbrances, and interests created
therein by the bankrupt.
(7) Where, on the release., removal, resignation or death of
a trustee in bankruptcy an official receiver is acting as
trustee, he may disclaim any property which might be dis-
claimed by a  trustee under the foregoing provisions, not-
withstanding that the time prescribed by this section for
such disclaimer has expired but such power of disclaimer
shall be exercisable only within twelve months af ter the
official receiver has become trustee in the circumstances
aforesaid, or has become aware of the existence of such
property, whichever period may last expire.
(8) Any person injured by the operation of a  disclaimer
under this section shall be deemed to be a  creditor of the
bankrupt to the extent of the injury, and may accordingly
prove the same as a  debt under the bankruptcy.
54. Subject to provisions of this Law, the trustee may do Powers of
IIfhf  II.th .trustee
a or any o t   e o owýng ýngs:- to dea! with
(a) selI all or any part of the property of the bankrupt property.
(including the goodwill of the business, if any,
and the book debts due or growing due to the
bankrupt) , by public auction or private contract, \
~ with power to transfer the whole thereof to any
-person or company, or to selI the same in parcels;
(b) give receipts for any money received by him, which
receipts shall effectually discharge the person
paying the money from all responsibility in
respect of the application thereof;
(c) prove, rank, claim, and draw a dividend in respect of
any debt due to the bankrupt ;
~ (d) exercise any powers the capacity to exercise which
is vested in the trustee under this Law, and
c. g

44 ~.] BANKRUPTCY- ~1
-
execrite any powers of attorney, deeds and other =
instruments for the purpose of carrying into
reffect the provisions of this Law.
Powe~s bl 55. (1) The trustee may with the permission of the com-
~;ertC:US:te: mittee oi inspection, do all or any of the following things:-
:~~i~er~f (a) carry on the business of the bankrupt, so far as may
?ommit;tee of be necessary for the beneficial winding up of the
ýnspection. same .
,
(b) bring, institute, or defend any action or other legal
8proceedings relating to the property of the
bankrupt;
(C) employ an advocate or other agent to take any
proceedings or do any business which may be
sanctioned by the committee of inspection;
(d) accept as the consideration for the sale of any
property of the bankrupt a sum of money pay-
able at a fýýture time subject to such stipulations
as to security and otherwise as the committee
thinks fit;
(e) mortgage or pledge any part of the property of the
bankrupt for the purpose of raising money for the
payment of his debts;
(f) refer any dispute to arbitration, compromise any
debts, claims, and liabilities, whether present or
future, certain or contingent, liquidated or un-
liquidated, subsisting or supposed to subsist
between the bankrupt and any person who may
have incurred any liability to the bankrupt, on
the receipt of such sums, payable at such times,
and generallyon such terms as may be agreed on;
(g) make such comprise or other arrangement as may
be thought expedient with creditors, or persons
claiming to be creditors, in respect of any debts ý-.
provable under the bankruptcy; -
(h) make such compromise or other arrangement as
may be thought expedient with respect to any
claim arising out of or incidental to the property
of the bankrupt, made or capable of being made
on the trustee by any person or by the trustee on
any person;
(ýý divide in its existing form amongst the creditors,
according to its estimated value, any property
which from its peculiar fiatlife or other special

, BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 4~ i
circumstances .cannot be readily or advan- ..
tageously sold.
~(2) The permission given for the purposes of this section
shalI not be a general permission to do aLI or any of the above
mentioned things, but shaU only be a  permission to do the
particular thing or things for which permission is sought in
the specified cage or cases.
56. Where any goods of a debtor against whom a receiving Right of
8 order has been made are held by any person by way of pledge, ~~~~~ ;~OdS
pawn, or other security, it shall be lawful for the offýcial pawned, etc.
receiver or trustee, af ter giving notice in writing of his
intention to do so, to inspect the goods, and, where such
notice has been given such person as aforesaid shalI not be
entitled to realise his security until he has given the trustee a
reasonable opportunity of inspecting the goods and of
exercising his right of redemption if  he thinks fit to do so.
57. Where the offýcial receiver or trustee has seized or Protection
disposed of any goods, chattels, property, or other effects in ~:C~~~~L
the possession or on the premises of a debtor against whom a  and trustees
receiving order has been made, without notice of any claim ~:nal
by any person in respect of the same, and it  is thereafter !iability.
made to appear that the said goods, chattels, property, or ~~sc:s~aýn
other effects were not, at the date of the receiving order, the
property of the debtor, the offýcial receiver or trustee shalI
not be personalIy liable for any loss or damage arising from
such seizure or disposal sustained by any person claiming
such property, nor for the costs of any proceedings taken to
establish a  claim thereto, unless the Court is of opinion that
the offýcial receiver or trustee has been guilty of negligence
in respect of the same.
8Distribution of Property.
58. (1) Subject to the retention of such sums as may be Decýa:ati?n
necessary for the costs of administration, or otherwise, the :i~~ ~fstribU-
trustee shall, with all convenient speed, declare and dis- dividends.
tribute dividends amongst the creditors who have proved
their debts.
(2) The first dividend, if any, shall be declared and dis-
tributed within four months af ter the conclusion of the first
meeting of the creditors, unless the trustee satisfies the
committee of inspection that there is suffýcient reason for
postponing the declaration to alater date.
g (2)

46 GAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
~
(3) Subsequent dividends shall, in the absenc.e o~ suffýcient
r- reason to the contrary, be declared and dýstnbuted at
intervals of not more than six months.
(4) Before declaring a dividend the trustee shall cause
notice of his intention to do so to be gazetted in the pre-
scribed manner, and shall also send reasonable notice thereof
to each creditor mentioned in the bankrupt's statement who
has not proved his debt.
(5) When the trustee has declared a dividend he shall send Ý-
to each creditor who has proved his debt a  notice showing
the amount of the dividend and when and how it  is payable,
and a  statement in the prescribed form as to the particulars
of the estate.
]oint and 59. (1) Where one partner of a fýrm is adjudged bankrupt,
ili~~:~~s a creditor to whom the bankrupt is indebted jointly with the
.other partners of the fýrm, or any of them shall not receive
any dividend out of the separate property of the bankrupt
unill all the separate creditors have received the full amount
of their respective debts.
(2) Where joint and separate properties are being ad-
ministered, dividends of the joint and separate properties
shall, subject to any order to the contrary that may be made
by the Court on the appIication of any person interested, be
declared together; and the expenses of and incident to such
dividends shall be fairly apportioned by the trustee between
the joint and separate properties, regard being had to the
work done for and the benefýt received by each property.
Provision 60. (1) In the calculation and distribution of a  dividend
for creditors
hhIIk..fdbtbbl.bkresiding at a t   e trustee s  a ma e provýsýon or e s pro a e ýn an-
distance, etc. ruptcy appearing from the bankrupt's statements, or other-
wise, to be due to persons resident in places so distant from
the place where the trustee is acting that in the ordinary 8
course of communication they have not had suffýcient time
to tender their proofs, or to establish them if  disputed, and
also for debts probable in bankruptcy. the subject of claims
not Jet determined.
(2) He shall also make provision for any disputed proofs
or claims, and for the expenses necessary for the adminis-
tration of the estate or otherwise.
(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions, he shall distribute
as dividend all money in hand.

BANKRUPTCY. [CM. 5. 47 i
61. Any creditor who has not proved his debi before the Rig~t of
~.
declaration of any dividend or dividends shall be entitled to c;:~ý~o:s
be paid out of any money for the time being in the hands of not proved
the trustee any dividend or dividends he may have failed to ~:~:aý::~~r:
receive before that money is  applied to the payment of any of a divi-
future dividend or dividends, bui he shall not be entitled to dend.
disturb the distribution of any dividend declared before his
debi was proved by reason that he has not participated
therein.
8 62. Where a debi has been proved, and such debi includes ~nterest on
interest, or any pecuniary consideration in lieu of interest, ebts.
such interest or consideration shall. for the purposes of divi-
dend, be calculated at a rate not exceeding iline per centum
per annum, without prejudice to the right of a  creditor to
receive out of the estate any higher rate of interest to which
he may be entitled af ter all the debts proved in the estate
have been paid in full.
63. (1) When the trustee has converted into money all the Fina! divi-
property of the bankrupt, or so much thereof as can, in the dend.
joint opinion of himself and of the committee of inspection,
be realized without needlessly protracting the trusteeship, he
shall declare a final dividend bui before so doing he shall give
notice in manýýer prescribed to the persons whose claims to be
creditors have been notified to him, bui not established to his
satisfaction that if  they do not establish their claims to the
satisfaction of the Court within a time limited by the notice,
he will proceed to declare a final dividend without regard to
their claims.
(2) Af ter the expiration of the tim,e so limited, or if the
Court, on application by any such creditor, grants him
further time for establishing his claim, then on the expiration
of such further time, the final dividend shall be distributed
8 among the creditors who have proved, without regard to the
claims of an y  other persons.
(3) if  the Court admits any claim which may have been re-
jected by the trustee, the holder of such claim shall be
entitled to be paid out of all available property in the hands
of the trustee, any dividend to which he would have been
entitled if  his claim had not been rejected by the trustee.
64. No action for a dividend shalllie against the trustee, ~o.~ti~nfOr
bui if  the trustee refuses to pay any dividend the Court may, ývý en .
on application being made if  it  thinks fit, order him to pay it,

48 CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
and also to payout of his own money interest thereon for the ~
time that it  is  withheld, and the costs of the appIication.
~ro~r 65. (1) The trustec, with the permission of the committee
b~~~t of inspection, may appoint the bankrupt himseli to superin-
to ma~e tend the management of the property of the bankrupt or of
prope. any part thereof, or to carry on the trade (if any) of the
bankrupt for the benefýt of his creditors, and in any other
respect to aid in administering the property in such manýýer
and on such terms as the trustee may direct. 8
(2) The trustee may from time to time, with the per-
mission of the committee of inspection, make such allowance
as he may think just to the bankrupt out of his property for
the support of the bankrupt and his family, or in considera-
tion of his services if  he is engaged in winding up his estate,
but any such allowance may be reduced by the Court.
Right of 66. The bankrupt sha11 be entitled t.o any surplus re-
~~~f:s. maining af ter payment in full of his creditors, with interest,
.as by this Law provided, and of the costs, charges, and
expenses of the proceedings under the bankruptcy petition.
PART LV.
OFFICIAL RECEIVERS.
Appoint- 67. (1) The Governor may, at any time af ter the passing of
~~:~~r this Law, and from time to time, appoint to be official
of of?cial receivers of debtors' estates such persons and at such salaries
~f~:~:r's as he thinks fýt and may remove any person so appointed
estate. from such office. The fýnancia! part of the duties of official
receivers sha11 be entirely under the direct control and super-
vision of the Accountant-General in the fýrst instance and of
the Director of Audit, but such official receivers sha11 be
8officers of the Conrts to which theyare respectively attached.
(2) The Governor may determine the number of officia!
receivers to be appointed, the security to be given by an
official receiver so appointed, and the judicial Districts to
be assigned to them. The same person may be appointed
to act for more than one judicial District.
(3) Whenever an official receiver sha11 be absent tem-
porarily through illness or otherwise, the President of the
District Court to which such official receiver is attached may
if  the Governor has not made a provisiona! appointment~
-~

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP.5. 49 i
appoint anather officer of the Court to discharge during the
~. time of such absence the duties of such official receiver.
Such officer of the Court shall give security as may be deter-
mined by the President of the District Court.
68.
(1)  The duties of the official receiver shal1 have S
ffitat~sýof
.o cýa
relatýon both to the conduct of the debtor and to the ad- receiver.
ministration of his estate.
a (2) An official receiver may, for the purpose of affidavits
..verifying proofs, petitions, or other proceedings under this
Law, administer oaths.
'-
(3) All expressions referring to the trustee under a bank-
ruptcy shall, unless the context otherwise requires, or the
Law otherwise provides,' include the official receiver when
acting as trustee.
(4) The trustee shal1 supply the official receiver with such
information, and give him such access to, and facilities for
inspecting the bankrupt's books and documents, and gener-
al1y shall give him such aid, as may be requisite for enabling
the official receÝver to perform his duties under this Law.
69. As regards the debtor, it shal1 be the duty of the ~~~~~ of
official receiver- receiver
(a) to investigate the conduct of the debtor and to ::1e~tor's
report to the Court, stating whether there is conduct.
reason to believe that the debtor has committed
any act which constitutes an offence under this
Law, or which would justify the Court in retusing,
suspending or qualifying an order for his dis-
charge;
(b) to make such other reports concemillg the conduct of
the debtor as the Court may direct;
...(c) to take such part as may be directed by the Court
..in the public examination of the debtor;
(d) to take such part, and give such assistance, in
relation to the prosecution of any fraudulent
debtor as the Attorney-General may direct.
70. (1) As reg.ards th.e estate of a  debtor, it  shall be the ~~~~ of
duty of the officýal receýver- receiver aýý
(a) pending the appointment of a  trustce, to act as ~~ý~~~~~
interim receiverofthe debtor's estate, and, where e~~te,
a  special ~anager is not appoint~d~ ~ ffiarýager
thereof;
,
~~

SO CAFe 5.] BANKRUPTCY. 1
(b) to authorize the special manager to raise money ?r
rmake advances for the puýposes of the estate ýn
any cage where, in the inteýests of the creditors,
it  appears necessary so to do;
(c) to summon and preside at the fýrst meeting of
creditors:
(d) to issue forms of proxy for use at the meetings of
creditors;
(e) to report to the creditors as to any proposa! which Ý-
the debtor may have made with respect to the ..
mode of liquidating his affairs;
(1) to advertise the receiving order, the date of the
creditors' fýrst meeting and of the debtor's
public examination, and such other matters as
it may be necessary to advertise;
(g) to act as trustee during any vacancy in the office of
trustec.
(2) For the puýpose of his duties as interim receiver or
manager the official receiver sha!l have the same powers as
if  he were a  receiver and manager appointed by the Court
but shall, as far as practicable, consult the wishes of the
creditors with respect to the management of the debtor's
property, and may for that puýpose, if  he thinks it  advisable,
-summon meetingsofthepersons claiming to be creditors, and
shall not, unless the Court otherwise order, incur any expense
beyond such as is requisite for the protection of the debtor's
property or the disposing of perishable goods:
Provided that, when the debtor cannot himself prepare a
proper statement of affairs, the officia! receiver may, subject
to any prescribed conditions, and at the expense of the
estate, employ some person or persons to assist in the pre-
paration of the statement of affairs.
(3) Every officia! receiver shall account to the Court and
8payover all moneys and deal with all securities in such'
manner as the Court from time to time directs.
PART V.
TRUSTEES IN BANKRUPTCY.
Official 71. The official name of a  trustee in bankruptcy shall be
name of
hf   hftrustee. "t e trustee o t   e property o
a bankrupt" (inserting the name o/the bankrupt), and by that---

i
BANKRUPTCY~ [CAP. 5. 51 ~
.
name the trustee may, in Cyprus or elsewhere, hold property
~.
of every description, make contracts, sue and be sued, enter
into any engagements binding on himseli and his successors
in office, and do all other acts necessary or expedient to be
done in the execution of his office,
72. (1) The creditors may, if  they think fýt, appoint more r:,:erOint
persons than one to the office of trustee, and when more joinf~r
8persons than one are appointed they shall declare whether sucressiye
any act required or authorized to be done by the trustee is trustees.
to be done by all or any one or more of such persons, but all
such persons are in this Law included under the term
"trustee," and shall be joint tenants of the property of the
bankrupt,
(2) The creditors may also appoint persons to act as
trustees in succession in the event of one or more of the
persons fýrst named declining to accept the office of trustee,
or failing to give security, or of the appointment of any such
person not being certifýed by the Court,
73. (1) if a  vacancy occurs in the office of a  trustee, the ~oceedings
d't'
1..fýllhýn case of
cre ý ors ýn genefa meetýng may appomt a person to t   e  vacancyin
vacancy, and thereupon the same proceedings shall be taken office of
as in the case of a  fýrst appointment, .trustee.
(2) The official receiver shall, on the requisition of any
creditor, summon a  meeting for the purpose of fýlling any
such vacancy,
(3) if the creditors do not, within three weeks af ter the
occurrence of a vacancy, appoint a person to fýll the
vacancy, the official receiver shall report the matter to the
Court and the Court may appoint a trustee,
(4) During any vacancy in the office of trustee the official
8 receiver shall act as trustee,
74. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Law, the trustee Discretion-
shall, in the administration of the property of the bankrupt :rS~~:~~dOf
and in the distribution thereof amongst his creditors, have control
d tdit'thb,b'A 1Ithereof. regar O any rec ýons at may e gýven y specý<ý.ý reso u-
tion of the creditors at any general meeting or by the com-
mittee of inspection and any directions so given by the
creditors at any general meeting shall, in case of conflict, be
deemed to override any directions given by the committee
of inspection.
(2) The trustee may summon general meetings ofcreditors

i
.52 CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. ~
.
for the putpose of ascertaining their wishes, he may also -
rapply to the Court, for directions in relation to any particular
matter arising under the bankruptcy.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Law, the trustee
shall use his own discretion in the management of the estate
and its distribution among the creditors.
tEP:tl to 75. if  the bankrupt or any creditor, debtor or other person
ag:inst is aggrieved by any act or decision of the trustee he may
8trustee. apply to the Court, and the Court may confýrm, reverse, or
modify the act or decision complained ot, and make such
order in the premises as it  thinks just.
Offiý;ial 76. (1) The official receiver shall take cognizance of the
receýver
dfh.
to inquire con uct o t   e trustee, and ýn the event of any trustee not
intodtlýe f faithfully performing his duties, and duly observing all the
~~: ~~:e. requirements of the law with respect to the performance of
his duties, or in the event of any complaint being made by
the bankrupt or any creditor in regard thereto, the official
receiver shall inquire into the matter and may move the
Court accordingly and the Court may make such order as
may be deemed expedient.
(2) The official receiver may at any time require any
trustee to answer any inquiry made by him in relation to
any bankruptcy in which the trustee is engaged, and may, if
the official receiver thinks fýt, apply to the Court to examine
on oath the trustee or any other person concerning the
bankruptcy.
(3) The official receiver may also direct a  local investi-
gation to be made of the books and vouchers of the trustee.
~emunera- 77. (1) Where the creditors appoint a.ny person to be
~~~ý:. trustee ot a  debtor's estate, his remuneration (if any) shall
be fýxed by an ordinary resolution of the creditors or, if  the 8
creditors so resolve, by the committee of inspection, and
shall be in the nature ot a commission or percentage, of which
one part shall be payable on the amou.nt realized by the
trustee af ter deducting any sums paid to secured creditors
out of the proceeds ot their securities, and the other part out
of the amount distributed in dividend. -
(2) If one fourth in number or value of the creditors dis-
seni from the resolution, or the bankrupt satisfies the Court
that the remuneration is  unnecessarily large, the Court shall
fýx the amount of the remuneration.

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 53 i
~
(3) The resolution shall express what expenses the re- -
muneration is to cover, and no liability sha11 attach to the
~bankrupt's estate, or to the creditors, in respect of any
expenses which the remune~ation is express~d to cover.
(4) Where a trustee acts wýthout remuneratýon, he sha11 be
allowed out of the bankrupt's estate such proper costs and
expenses incurred by him in or about the proceedings of the
bankruptcy as the creditors may, with the sanction of the
Couri, approve.
8 (5) A trustee sha11 not, under any circumstances whatever,
make any arrangement for or accept from the bankrupt, or
any advocate, auctioneer, or any other person that may be
employed about a  bankruptcy, any gift, remuneration, or
pecuniary or other consideration, or benefýt whatever beyond
the remuneration fýxed by the creditors and payable out of
the estate, nor sha11 he make any arrangement for giving up
or give up any part of his remuneration, either as receiver,
manager, or trustee to the bankrupt or any advocate or other
person that may be employed ab out a bankruptcy.
78. (1) Where a trustee or manager receives remuneration Allowance.
fh..hthallbIId.h .and taxatýon
or ýs servýces as suc, no paymen s e a owe ýn ýs of costs.
accounts in respect of the performance by any other person
of the ordinary duties which are required by this Law or
rules to be performed by himseli.
(2) Where the trustee is  an advocate he may contract that
the renumeration for his services as trustee shall Ýnciýýde all
professional services.
(3) All bills and charges of advocates, managefs, accoun-
tants, auctioneers, brokers, and other persons, not being
trustees, sha11 be taxed by the prescribed offýcer, and no
payments in respect thereof shall be allowed in the trustee's
accounts without proof of such taxation having been made.
8 The taxing offýcer sh~ll satisfy himseli before passing such
bills and charges that the employment of such advocates
and other persons, in respect of the particular matters out of
which such charges arise, has been duly sanctioned. The
sanction must be obtained before the employment, except in
cases of urgency, and in such cases it  must be shown that no
undue rlelay took place in ohiaining the sanction.
(4) Every such person sha11, on request by the trustee
(which request the trustee shall make a sufficient time before
declaring a  dividend) deliver his bill of costs or charges to
the proper officer for taxation, and if  he fai1s to do so within

ýý-~!I",
..,~,,~!';:~~-,,~,.",c
I1,"":"
54 CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY.
seven days af ter receipt of the request, or such further time .
as the Court, on application, may grant, the trustee shall
rdeclare and distribute the dividend without regard to any
claim by him, and thereupon any such claim shall be for-
feited as well against the trustee personatir as against the
estate.
Trustee not 79. The trustee shall not pay sums received by him as
to pay
tt.
th..tbk.
money into rus ee ýn o ýs pnva e an ýng account.
privatet He shall have at such local bank as the commi ttee of a
accoun .inspection or in default of appointmen1ý the Court shall ..
appoint, a separate and distinct account in the name of the
estate administered by him, in which bank all sums received
by him shall be paid to the credit of the estate; and if  he,
at any time, keeps in his hands any sum exceeding fýfty
pounds for more than ten days he shall be subject to the
following liabilities, that is to say-
(a) he shallpayinterest at the rate of twenty per centum
per annum on the excess of such sum above
fýfty pounds as he may retain in his hands;
(b) unless he can prove to the satisfaction of the Court
that his reason for retaining the money was
sufficient, he shall, on the application of the
official receiver or of any creditor, be dismissed
from his office by the Court, and shall have no
claim for remuneration, and be liable to any
expenses to which the creditors may be put by
or in consequence of his dismissal.
Accounts of 80. The trustee shall open and keep proper books of
;:;~:~ts. accounts and of other matters relating to his trusteeship
and shall make his payments, in the prescribed manner.
~~~ur::s oto 81. (1) The trustee shall ~ause hi~ accou~ts to be al1dited
officia! every month by the commýttee of ýnspectýon and he shall, ..
receiver. every three months, forward a certifýed copyof such accounts ý-
to the official receiver.
(2) He shall transmit to the official receiver on his applica-
tion, a  statement showing the proceedings in such bank-
ruptcy up to the date of the statement containing the
prescribed particulars, and made out in the prescribed form.
(3) The trustee, for the purposes of the examination of
such accounts and statement, shall furnish the official
receiver with such vol1chers and information as shall be
required.
i

.BANKRUPTCY, [CAP.5. 55 i
(4) if  the trustee fails to transmit any of the accounts and -
~statements above referred to or to fumish the vouchers and
information required, the Court may on the application of
the offýcial receiver deal with the trustee as provided in
paragraph (b) of section 79.
82. (1) When the trustee has realized al] the property of ~el~ase of
the bankrupt or so much thereof as can in his opinion be us re.
realized without needlessly protracting the trusteeship,
a and distributed a  final div.idend, if  any, or has resigned, or
..has been removed from hýs office, or has ceased to acý by
reason of a composition having been approved, he may
requestthe offýcial receiver to call a meeting of the creditors
to consider an application to be made to the Court for his
release.
(2) At such meeting the trustee shall lay before the
creditors an account showing the manýýer in which the
bankruptcy has been conducted, with a list of the unclaimed
dividends, if  any, and of the property, if  any, outstanding,
and shall inform the meeting that he proposes to apply to the
Court for his release.
(3) The creditors assembled at the meeting may express
their opinion on the conduct of the trustee, and they or any
of them may appear before the Court and oppose the release
of the trustee.
83. The Court, af ter hearing what, if anything, can be P?wer of
urged against the release of the trustee, shall grant or with- ~~e :a:~ or
hold the release accordingly, and if  it  withholds the release withhold
shall make such order as it  thinks just, charging the trustee ~~~:.of
with the consequences of any act or default he may have
done or made contrary to his duty, and shall suspend his
release unill such charging order has been complied with,
and the Court thinks just, to grant the release of the trustee.
ý-. 84. (1) The order of the Court releasing the trustee shall E~ect off
..discharge him from allliability in respect of any acý done or ~~ues~:"o
default made by him in the administration of the "affairs of
the bankrupt or otherwise in relation to his conduct as
trustee but such order may be revoked by the Court on
proof that it was obtained by fraud or by suppression or
concealment of any material fact.
(2) When the trustee has not previously resigned or been
removed, his release shall operate as a removal of him from
his office, and thereupon the offýcial receiver shall be the
trustee.

56 GAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
(3) When on the Telcage of a  trustec, an official receiver -
is, or is acting as, trustec, no liability shall attach to him
~personally in respect of any act done or default made, or
liability incurred by any pnor trustec.
~:::~~g 85. if  a receiving order is made against a trustee he sha!l
bankrupt. thereby vacate his office of trustec.
~::Ý:~::ove 86. (1) The creditors may by ordinary resolution at a ..
trustee. meeting specially called for that purpose, of which notice ..
shall be given in the prescnbed manner, remove a  trustee
appointed by them and appoint another one in his stead.
(2) If, on the application of the officia! receiver or, any
interested person, the Court is  of opinion-
(a) that a trustee is guilty of misconduct, or fails to
perform his duties under this Law; or
(b) that his trusteeship is being protracted without any
probable advantage to the creditors; or
(c) that he is, byreason of lunacy, or continued sickness,
or absence, incapable of performing his duties; or
(d) that his connection with or relation to the bank-
rupt, or his estate, or any particular creditor,
might make it diffýcult for him to act with
impartiality in the interest of the creditors
generally; or
(e) where in any other matter he has been removed from
office on the ground of misconduct,
the Court may remove him from his office.
PART VI. 8
jURISDICTION, PROCEDURE, AND POWERS OF COURT.
jurisdiction 87. The Courts having jungdiction in bankruptcy shall be
to be. d b the ilistnct Courts and in the exercise of such jungdiction
~~~~: Y  shall subject to the provisions of this Law have all the powers
Conrts. conferred on ilistnct Courts as in the tnal of a civil action.
Petition 88. (1) A bankruptcy petition against a  debtor sha!l be
where to be
dhD..Cfhdi..hihhpresented. presente to t  e ýstnci ourt or t  e stnct ýn w c t  e

", BAN KR UPTCY. [CAP. 5. 57 i
, ~
debtor has resided or carried on business för the longest .
period during the six months immediately preceding the
~presentation of the petition.
(2) N othing in this section shall invalidate a proceeding by
reason of its being taken in a wrong Court.
89. if any question of lawarises in any bankruptey pro- ~ :tated
ceeding in a District Court, which all parties to the proceed- o~~:Ýo~
ings desire, or which one of them and the judges of the ~f the
8pistrict ~ourt may desire, to have ~et~rmined in the first ~~~~e
ýnstallee ýn the Supreme Court, the Dýstnct Court shall state
the facts, in the form of a special case, for the opinion of the
Supreme Court. The special case and the proceedings, or
such of them as may be required, shall be transmitted to the
Supreme Court for the purposes of the determination.
90.. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Law every Court General
h...di.dh.LhIIhfIIpowers and
avýng Juns ctýon un er t  ýs aw s  a ave u power to juri~diction
decide all questions of priorities, and all other questions of Conrts in
whatsoever, whether of law or fact, which may arise in any bankruptcy.
case of bankruptcy coming within the cognizance ot the
Court, or which the Court may deem it  expedient or neces-
sary to decide for the purpose of doing complete justice or
making a co:mPlete distribution of property in any such case.
(2) The Court shall have jurisdiction to try and adjudicate
upon all questions of ownership relating to goods and im-
movable property claimed by or from the trustee, whether
such property be in the possession of the trustee or not, and
to decide and adjudicate upon any debt or claim due to or
from the bankrupt.
(3) Where default is made by any trustee, debtor or other
person in obeying any order or direction of the Court, under
any power conferred by this Law, or when any person is
gui1ty of contempt of Court, the Court may af ter hearing
8 such person, or af ter proof of his having been duly summoned
to attend the Court, commit such person to prison for any
term not exceeding one month. And the Court may at any
time rescind any such order provided that the power given
by this subsection shall be deemed to be in addition to and
not in substitution for any other right or remedy in respect
of such default.
91. The Courts having jurisdiction in bankruptey in ~u:ý o~
Cyprus and the officers of those Courts respectively shall i:~YP~8 y
act in aid of and be auxi1i~ry to British Courts elsewhere :~
--

58 GAP. 5..] BANKRUPTCY.
~  ~h:r having jurisdiction in bankruptcy, and an order of such =
cr:u~s of British Court situated elsewhere as aforesaid seeking aid,
rBankruptcy. with a  request to a  Court in Cyprus having jurisdiction in
bankruptcy, shall be deemed suffýcient to enable the latter
Court to exercise, in regard to the matters directed by the
order, such jurisdiction as either the Court which made the
request, or the Court to which such request is made, cowd
exercise in regard to similar matter within their jurisdictions.
Appeal. 92. (1) Every Court having jurisdiction in bankruptcy
under this Law may review, rescind or vary any order made 8
by it under its bankruptcy jurisdiction.
(2) Any judgment or order of the Court given or any
question other than a mere question of form or procedure or
of costs, sha11 be subject to appeaý before the Supreme Court.
(3) No such appeal shall be entertained except in con-
formity with such general rules as may for the time being be
in force in relation to appeals in civil actions.
Discretion- 93. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Lawand to
~~':~~ of ge~eral rules, the costs of and incidental to any proceeding in
Court under this Law shall be in the discretion of the Court.
(2) The Court may at any time adjoum any proceedings
?efore it upon such terms, if  any, as it may think fit to
ýmpose.
(3) The Court may at any time amend any written
process or proceeding under this Law upon such terms, if
any, as it  may think fit to impose.
(4) Where by this Law or by general rwes, time for doing
anything is limited, the Court may extend the time either
before or af ter the expiration thereof, upon such terms, if
any, as the Court may think fit to impose.
(5) Subject to general rules, the Court may, in any matter,
take the whole or any part of the evidence either viva voce, -
or by interrogatories or upon affýdavit or by commission ,.
abroad.
~nso~ida- 94. Where two or more bankruptcy petitions are pre-
;:ti~ns. sented against the same debtor or against joint debtors, the
Court may consolidate the proceedings, or any of them, on
such terms as the Court thinks fýt.
P::wer to 95. Where the petiiiüner does not proceed with due
~::ý::e of diligence on his petition, the Court may substitute as
proceedings.

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 59 i
~
petitioner any other creditor to whom the debtor may be -
rindebted in the amount required by this Law in the case of
thepetitioning creditor.
96. if a debtor by oragainst whom a bankruptcy petition Continuance
...
hallof proceed- has been presented dýes, the proceedýngs ýn the matter s ,ings on death
unl~ss the Court otherwise order, be continued as if  he were of debtor.
alive.
8 97. The Court may at any time, for sufficient reason make Power to
an order staying the proceedings under a bankruptcy ~~~~i~;~~
petition either altogether or for a limited time, on such terms
and subject to such conditions as the Court may think just.
98. Any creditor whose debt is sufficient to entitle him to Power
bk...tallthtfto present
present a an ruptcy petýtýon agaýns e  par ners o a  petition
firm may present a petitionagainst any one or more partners against one
of the firm without including the others. partner.
99. Where a  member of a  partnership is  adjudged bank- t~~~e~s ~!d
rupt, the Court may authorize the trustee to commence and bankrupt's
prosecute any action in the names of the trustee and of the partners.
bankrupt's partner; and any release by such partner of the
debt or demand to which the action relates shall be void, but
notice of the application for authority to commence the
actionshall be given to him, and he may show cause against .
it, and on his application, the Court may, if it thinks fit,
direct that he shall receive his proper share of the proceeds
of the action, and if  he does not claim any benefýt therefrom,
he shall be indemnified against costs in respect thered! as
the Court directs.
100. Any two or more persons, being partners, or any rnro;~~~~-
person carrying on business under a  partnership name, may ship name
8 take proceedings or be proceeded against under this Law in
the name of the firm, but in such case the Court may, on
application by any person interested, order the names of
the persons who are partners in such fýrýn or the name of such
person to be disclosed in such manner, and verified on oath,
or otherwise, as the Court may direct.
101. Where a  bankrupt is a  contractorin respect of any AC~o.ýý~
contract jointly with any person or persons, such person or ~~~Ý:cts.
persons may sue or be sued in respect of the contract with-
out the joinder of the bankrupt.
c. lý

C~C
i~ CAP. ~.]., ~~NKRUPTCY~_~
:~f~ not to 102. (1) No pröceeding Ýn baý:ýkruptcy: þhall be invalidated
r- invalidate by any form al defect or by any ýrregulanty, unless the Court
proceedings. before which an objection is made to the proceeding is of
apiýýion that substantial injustice has been caused by the
defect or irregularity and that the injustice cannot be
remedied by any order of that Court.
(2) No defect or irregularity in the appointment or
election of a receiver, trustee, or member of a committee of
inspection shall vitiate any act done by him in good faith.
S~m~~ 103. (1) When a petition is presented by or against a 8
~ioý:li~S ra- debtor, if  the Court is satisfied by affýdavit or otherwise, or
smaIl cases the offýcial receiver reports to the Court that the property of
the debtor is not likely to exceed two hundred polinds, the
Court may make an order that the debtor's estate be admini-
stered in a  summary manner. and thereupon the provisions
of this Law shall be subject to the following modifications:-
(a) if the debtor is adjudged bankrupt, the offýcial
receiver shall be trustee in bankruptcy;
(b) there shall be no comrnittee of inspection, but the
offýcial receiver may do with the permission of
the Court all things which may be done by the
trustee with the permission of the committee of
inspection;
(c) no advocates' tees shall be allüwed in any such cage
except upon a  certificate of the Court that the
presence of an advocate as aforesaid was
necessary,
(2) Such other modifications may be made in the pro-
visions of this Law as may be prescribed by general rules
with a  view of saving expense and simplifying procedure;
but nothing in this section shall permit the modification of
the provisions of this Law relating to the examination or
discharge of the debtor, 8
PART VII,
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS,
Exclusion. of 104. A  receiving order shall not be made against an
ycor-
partnershýp., " ,
and. com- paratýon or agaýnst any partnershýp or assocýatýon, or
panýes. company registered under the Companies Law,
Cap. 1ý3.
APl?li<:ation ..105. Subject to such modifications as may be made by
to lýmýted
LLdh,Lh' ,
fh,
Lpartnershipg. genefa ru es un er t  ýs aw, t   e  provýsýons o t  ýs aw

i
BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 61 ~
.
shal1 apply to limited partnerships in like manýýer as if
rlimited partnerships were ordinary partnershipg, and, on all
the general partners of a limited partnership being adjudged
bankrupt, the assets of the limited partnership shall vest in
the trustec.
106. ~ny debtor, whether tra~er or not, against whom ~~dý:ej be
proceedings can be legally taken ýn Cyprus for the recovery ba~krupt.
of a  debt shall be liable to be adjudged a bankrupt as in this
8 Law pr?vided: .
Provýded always that no debtor, not bemg a  trader or
farmer at the time of the commencemerýt of this Law, shall
be adjudged bankrupt in respect of a  debt incun-ed before
the commencement of this Law or of a  debt incurred before
and renewed af ter the commencemenf. of this Law, or in
consequence of proceedings legally taken for the tecovery of
such debt.
l07. (1) Any creditor of a  deceased debtor whose debt ~d~nistra-
would have been sufficient to support a bankrýýptcy petition b~:k~~ptcy
against such debtor had he been alive, may present to the of esta~ ?f
Court a petition in the prescribed form praying for an order r::f:enrng
for the administration of the estate of the deceased debtor,
according to the Law of Bankruptcy.
(2) Upon the prescribed notice being given to the executor
of the deceased debtor or if there is none to the adminis-
trator of his estate, the Court may, in the prescribedmanner,
upon proof of the petitioner's debt, unless the Court is
satisfýed that there is a reasonable probability that the estate
will be sufficient for the payment of the debts owing by the
deceased, make an order for the administration in bank-
ruptcy of the deceased debtor's estate, or may upon cause
shown dismiss such petition with or without costs.
8(3) Upon an order being made for the administration of a
deceased debtor' s estate, the property of the debtor shall vest
in the official receiver of the Court, as trustee thereof, and he
shall forthwith proceed to realize and distribute the same in
accordance with the provisions of this Law.
(4) With the modifýcations, hereinafter mentioned, all the
provisions of Part iLI of this Law, relating to the adminis-
tration of the property of a bankrupt, shall, so far as the
same are applicable, apply to the case of an administration
order under this section in like manýýer as to an order of
adjudication under this Law.
lý (2)

62 CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
'"
(5) Provided always that nothing inthis section shall alter ~
the order of the liquidation of the debts of a deceased person
rCap. ý89. under the provisions of the Administration of Estates Law.
(6) In the administration ot the property of the deceased
debtor under an order of administration, the offýcial receiver
shall have regard to any claim by the executor or adminis-
trator of the estate of the deceased debtor to payment of the
proper funeral and testamentary expense incurred by him in
and about the debtor's estate, and such claims shall be
deem.ed a p~eferential. debt under the o!der, and .sý.ýall, 8
notwýthstanding anythýng to the contrary ýn the provýsýons
of this Law relating to the priority of other debts be payable
in full, out of the debtor's estate, in priority to all other
debts.
(7) If, on the administration of the deceased debtor's
estate, any surplus remains in the hands of the offýcial
receiver, af ter payment in full of all the debts dile from the
debtor, together with the costs of the administration and
interest as provided by this Law in case of bankruptcy, such
surplus shall be paid over to the executor or administrator
i of the deceased debtor's estate, or dealt with in such other
manýýer as may be prescribed.
(8) Notice of the presentation of a petition under this
section shall, in the event of an order for administration
being made thereon, be deemed to be equivalent to notice of
an act of bankruptcy, and any transfer, disposition, charge,
delivery, contract, or payment made, relating to, or affecting
the property to be administered under the order, and any
execution or attachment had against the said property or any
part thereot, af ter notice of the presentation of such petition,
shall be void as against the offýcial receiver. Save as afore-
said, nothing in this section shall invalidate any payment
made or any act or thing done or suffered in good faith before
the making of the order for administration. 8
Power 108. The Goveroor, with the advice and assistance of the
~~n~e Chiet Justice, may from time to time by writingunder the.
rules. hand and offýcial seal of the Governor and the hand of the
Chief J ustice make, revoke, and alter general rules to be
gazetted for carrying into effect the objects of this Lawand
prescribing the fees, charges and percentages to be charges'
or taken for or in respect of proceedings thereunder.
Fees,
charges, 109. (l) The fees, charges and percentages of the offýcial
~~~i~f receiver fixed as in section l08 hereof mentioned and all other
receiver.

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 63 i
.
costs or expenses of the official receiver shall be levied by the
official receiver out of the debtor's estate and shall be paid
~.
into the Department of the Accountant-General. Such fees,
charges, percentages and other costs or expenses shall be
paid by privilege as provided in section 36 hereof.
(2) All necessary disbursements made by the official
receiver when acting under this Law (the amount of which
disbursements shall be settled by the Court) shall be paid
out of the estate, if  sufficient, and otherwise shall be payable
8 by the petitioning creditor and recoverable upon a certificate
of the Registrar of the amount allawed by the Court:
Provided that it  shall be lawful for the Governor to remit
the whole or part of the costs payable by the petitioning
creditor under this section.
110. (1) A copy of ~he Gazette containing any notice Ga;zettetobe
inserted therein in pursuance ot this Law shall be evidence eVldence.
of the facts stated in the notice.
(2) The production of a  copy of the Gazette containing
any notice of a  receiving order, or of an order adjudging a
debtor bankrupt, shall be conclusive evidence in allIega! pro-
ceedings of the order having been duly made, and of its date.
lll. (1) A minute of proceedings at a meeting of creditors Eviden<;e of
under this Law, signed at the same or the next ensuing ~~~::ý~~~
meeting, by a person describing himself as, or appearing to be, of creditors.
chairman of the meeting at which the minute is signed, shall
be received in evidence without further proof.
(2) Until the contrary is proved,every meeting of creditors
in respectof the proceedings whereof a minute has been so
signed shall be deemed to have been duly convened and
held, and all resolutions passed or proceedings had thereat
to have been duly passed or had.
8 112. Any petition or copy of a petition in bankruptcy, any Eviden<;e of
order or certificate or copy of an order or certificate made by f:~~:~~gs
any Court having jurisdiction in bankruptcy, anyinstrument kruptcy.
or copy of an instrnment, affidavit, or document made or .
used in the course of any bankruptcy proceedings, or other
proceedings had under this Law shall, if it appears to be
sea!ed with the seal of any Court having jurisdiction in bank-
ruptcy, or purports to be signed by any judge thereof, or is
certified as atrue copy by any Registrar thereof, be re-
ceivable in evidence in allIega! proceedings whatever.
"C-'~,_.-

~C:AP. ~._] BANKRUP~CY, -i
~;~a::t~.of 113. Subject to g7nera! rilles any affidavit to be used in -
rbankruptcyproceedýngs may be swom before suchpersons
who are authorized to administer oaths in civil proceedings
beforethe DistriGt Court,
Death of 114. In cage of the death of the debtor or his wife, or of a
debtor or ,
h'
dhb.
d  bCt'
witness. wýtness W ose evý ence as -een receýve y  an your ýn
any proceedings under this Law, the depositian of the person
so deceased, purporting to be sea!ed with the seal of the
Cou~, or a  c°p,Y thereof purporting to be,so sealed, sha11 be
8admýtted as evýdence of the matters thereýn deposed to.
DisPo.salof 115. (1) Where the trustee has under his control any un-
~:~~~ý:ýnn~d claimed dividend which has remained unclaimed for more
dividends. than six months, or where, af ter making a final dividend,the
trustee has in his hands or under his control any unclaimed or
uýidistributed money arising from the property of the debtor,
he sha!l forthwith pay the same to the RegistraL of the
Court, who shall carry the same to an account to be termed
"The Bankruptcy Estates Accounts," The Registrar's
reGeipt tar the money so paid shall be s~fficient discharge to
the trustee in respect thereof,
(2) The trustee, whether he has obtained his release or not,
may be called upon by the Court to account for any un-
claimed funds or dividends, and any failure to comply with
the requisitions of the Court in this behalf may be dealt
with as a  contempt of Court.
(3) Any person claiming to be entitled to any moneys
paid into the Bankruptcy Estates Account may, within five
years of the date when the same was so paid in, apply to
the Registrar tor payment to him ot the þame, and the
Registrar, if satisfied that the person claiming is entitled,
shall make an order for the payment to such person of the
sum due. Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the
Registrar may appeal to the Court, 8
(4) Af ter anymoney has remained unclaimed in the Bank-
.ruptcy Estates Account for a period of five years, the Regis-
trar shall pay the same over to the Accountant-General for
use of the Crown, and all claims thereon shall bethenceforth
barred,
Punishment 116. Any person who has been adjudged bankrupt or in
~~~:~Ulent respect of whose estate a receiving order has been made
shall, in each of the cases following, be deemed gui1ty of an
offence, and on Gonvictio:n thereof, .hall be liable to be~

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 65
-
imprisoned for any term not exceeding fýve years, that is to -
say-
r(a) if he does not to the best ot his knowledge and Failure
belief, fully and truly discover to the trustee all ;~ýF~~:-
his property movable and immovable, and how covery to
; and to whom and for what consideration and trustee.
" when he disposed of a:ny part thereof, and what
sums he has annually spent for his personal
expenses and the ordinary expenses of his family,
unless the Court is satisfýed that he had no
intent to defraud;
(b) if  he does not deliver up to the trustee, or as he may Fai.lure to
direct, all such part of his movable and im- ~~~;:~~~
movable property as is in his custody or under his
control, and which by law constitutes the assets
divisible amongst his creditors, unless the Court
is  satisfýed that he had no intent to defraud;
(c) if  he does not deliver up to the trustee, or as he may Failur.e
d.
IIbkdd.t' to delýver
ýrect, a 00 S, ocuments, papers an wn mgs books etc.
in his custody or under his control relating to his .
property or affairs, unless the Court is satisfýed
that he had no intent to defraud;
(d) if, af ter the presentation of a bankruptcy petition by Conceal-
or against him, or within twelve months next :~~&ation,
before such presentation, he conceals, destroys, falsification,
mutilates or .falsifýes, or is privy to the conceal- ~~~Ýý:~fetc.
ment, destruotion, mutilation or falsifýcation of '
any book or document affecting or relating to
his property or affairs, unless the Court is
satisfýed that he had no intent to conceal the
state of his affairs or otherwise to defraud;
(e) if, af ter th.e pres~ntation of a bankruptcy petit~on by f~:ve:~~~~-
or agamst hým, he prevents the productýon of tion~f
any book, document, paper or writing affecting books, etc.
-or relating to his property or affairs~ unless the
..Court is satisfýed that he had no intentto conceal
the state of his affairs or otherwise to defraud;
(f) if, af ter the presentation of a bankruptcy petition by False entries.
or against him, or within twelve months next
before such presentation, he makes or is privy to
the making of any false entry in any book or
docun:ent affecting or relating to hisproperty or
affairs, unless the Court is satisfýed that he had
no intent to conceal the state of his affairs or
otherwise to defraud;
.

66 CAP. 5..] BANKRUPTCY" i
~~gwith, (g) if, af ter the presentation.ofa. bankruptcypetition -
~::rý::ý~nts. by or against him, or within twelve months
rnext be!ore such presentation, he ~ra;~du~ently
parts wýth, alters or makes any omýssýon ýn, or
is privy to the fraudulently parting with,
altenflg, or making any omission in any docu-
ment affecting or relating to his property or
affairs;
Omission in (h) if  he makes any material omission in any statement
statements.
fft"It"th"
rtff  . a ec ýng or re a  ýng o ýs prope y  or a aýrs, -
unless the Court is satisfied that he had no intent .,
to defraud;
~fo~~6;erl;t (i) if, af ter the prese~tation ?f ~  bankruptey petition
or debts, or by or agaýnst hým, or wýthýn twelve months next
disposition of before such presentation he conceals any part of
property for .'
fh"
less than hýs property or any debt due to or rom ým, or
market value disposes of any part of his goods or property for
any consideration which is substantia11y less in
value than the usual market value of such goods
or property, unless the Court is  satisfied that he
had no intent to defraud;
Removal of (j) if, af ter the presentation of a bankruptey petition by
property. or against him, or within twelve months next
before such presentation, he fraudulently
removes any part of his property;
foa?:f~~m (k) if, kn?wing ör believing that a  false debt has been
trustee of claýmed or proved by any person under the
false debts. bankruptey he iai1s for the period of one month
from the date of such knowledge or belief to
bring the matter to the notice of the trustfe;
~~~~ioe~~ (l) if, after the presentation of a bankruptey petition by
, .or against him, or at any meeting of his creditors
within twelve months next before such presen-
tation he attempts to account for any part of his
property by fictitious losses or expenses; 8
~~~~~g (m) if, wi~hin twelve months next. ?efore the pre~en-
false repre- tatýon of a bankruptey petýtýon by or agaýnst
sentation. him or af ter the presentation of such a  petition
and before the making of a  receiving order, he,
by any false representation or other fraud, has
obtained any property on credit and has not paid
for the same;
~~~~ng (n) if, within twelve months next before the presen-
o~e~~es of ta;tion of a bankruptey pc;-tition by or ag~~st
~arrying on hým, or af ter the presentatýon of such a  petýtýon
bu$iness.

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 67 i
and before the making of a  receiving order, he -
:.- obtains underthe false pretence ofcarrying on
rbusiness, and, if a trader, of dea1ing in the
ordinary way of his trade, anyproperty on credit
and he has not paid for the same, unless the
Court is satisfýed that he had no intent to defraud;
(O) if, within twelve months next before the presen- Pawning:.
tation of a bankruptcy petition by or against ~~~gagýng,
him or af ter the pre~entation of ~u.ch a  petition ~~~~r:~
a --and before the makýng of a  receývýng order, he on credit.
...1:'- pawns, pledges, mortgages, or disposes of other-
.;.~. c wise than in the ordinary way of his trade any
property which he has obtained on credit and
has not paid for, unless the Court is satisfýed that
he had no intent to- defraud;
(P) if, after the presentation of a  bankruptcy petition ~aking
by or against him, or ~thin twelve months next ~~~~~~~,
before such presentatýon, he has made any gift, etc., of
sale, delivery, transfer, mortgage of, or any property.
charge on his property, unlessthe Court is satis-
fýed that he had no intent to defraud;
(q) if he is guilty of any false representation or other Obtaining
fraud for the purpose of obtaining the consent of ~~::Ýt~;sof
his creditors or any of thern to any agreement by false
.
thfth.ff  .bkrepresenta-
wý re erence o ýs a aýrS or an ruptcy; tion.
(r) if, af ter the presentation of any bankruptcy petition Quitting: or
b.
t  h.
h..attemptýng
y  or agaýns ým, e  quýts or attempts to quýt to quit
the Colony, unless the Court is satisfýedthat he Colony.
had no intent to defraud;
(5) if, knowing his insolvency., he shall havepermitted Permitting
or suffered the whole or substantially the whole ~S;l~:J~o~e
of his assets to be seized by, or appIied for the the ben~fýt
bfýtfd'
tdi.hd.of certaýn
eýýe O a cre ý or or cre tors to t e etn- creditors.
ment of and with intent to defraud other
8 creditors,
For the purpose of this section, the expression "trustee" Trustee
means the offýcial receiver of the debtor's estate or trustee derýned.
administering his estate for the benefýt of his creditors,
117. Where an undischarged bankrupt- U:n-
(  )'
thal..
tl.hhb.dýscharged'
a eý er one or ]oýn y wýt anyot er person o taýns bankrupts c
credit to the extent of ten pounds or upwards obt;fing
from any person without informing that person cre ý .
th~t he is an undischarged bankrupt; or
(b) engages in any trade or business under.anameother
---

68 CAP. 5.~ BANKRUPTCY. -i
.than that under wrnch he was adjudicated bank- ~
rupt without disclosing to all persons with whom
rhe enters into any busi~ess transaction the name
under wmch he was adjudicated bankrupt,
he sh~ll be guilty of an offence and on conviction thereof,
liable to be imprisoned for any term not exceeding three
years,
{ra~ds ~Y 118. li any person who has been adjudged bankrupt or
an rup s. in respect of whose esta~e ~ receiving or~er has been made- 8
(a) in incurring any debt or liability, has obtained
credit under false pretences or by means of any
other fraud;
(b) with intent to defraud his creditors or any of them,
has made or caused to be made any gift,
delivery, or transfer of or any charge on his
property;
(c) with intent to defraud ms creditors, has concealed or
removed any part of his property since or within
two months befoýe the date of any unsatisfied
judgment or order for payment of money
obtained against mm,
he shall be guilty of an offence, and on conviction thereof,
,  shall be liable to be imprisoned for any term not exceeding
five years.
Punishment 119. if any person, af ter the presentation of a  bank-
~~!;~~~;,s ruptcy petition by or against any qebtor who is subsequently
etc., pro- adjudged bankrupt, or within twelve months next before
E~~r~~t. such presentation, removes or conceafs or canses to be
removed or concealed or receives either for his own benefit
or for the benefit of such debtor or of any other person, any
part of the property of such debtor which ought by law to be
divided amongst his creditors, such person shall be guilty
?f an, offence, and on convi~tion the~eof, shal1 be liable to be 8
ýmpnsoned for any term not exceeding fiveyears; unless the
Court is satisfied that he had no intent to defraud.
False cl~ims, 120. if any creditor or any person claiming to be a
declaratýons
d't'
bkdi.lfIId.hetc., against cre ý or ýn any an ruptcy procee ng wý u y an wýt
bankrupt. intent t? defraud makes any false cl~im~ or any .proof,.
declaratýon or statement of account whých ýs untrue ýn any
material particUlar, he shall be guilty of an offence and on
conviction thereof, shall be liable to be imprisoned for any
teý:m not exçeeding one year. .
~

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP.5. 69 i
121. Whoever being a trustee shall, in any report or Pfu::Shý;:ýe~t .
~statement relating to the affairs of any person who has been ~onc~:l:en~:
adjudged bankrupt, wilfully make any materia! omission, e~.~ of f
or conceal or withhold any information or matter tending to ~a:~u~t.
show the true condition of the affairs of such person or the
circumstances of the bankruptcy, or sha!l in any way assist
any person to commit any of the offences in this Law men-
tioned, then in every such case such trustee shal1 be guilty
of an offence and on conviction thereof, shall be liable to be
8 imprisoned for any term not exce:eding three years.
122. (1) if any person is adjudgedbankrupt or has made B~ý:ýkrupt
a c~~position ?r arran{?ement with ~is creditors, or if a  :~l~~~p
receýVlng order ýs made ýn respect of his estate, he shall be proper
guilty of an offence, if, having during the whole or any part accounts.
of the two years immediately preceding the date of the
presentation of the bankruptcy petition been engaged inany
trade or business, he has not kept proper books of account
throughout those two years or such part thereof as aforesaid,
and, if  so engaged at the date of presentationof the petition,
thereafter, whilst so engaged, up to the dat~of the receiving
order, or has not preserved all books of account so kept:
Provided that a  person who has not kept or has not pre-
served sl:1ch books of account shall not be convicted of an
offence under this sectýon if  his unsecured liabilities at the
date of the receiving order did not exceed one hundred
polinds, or it  he proves that in the circumstances in which he
traded or carried on business the omission was honest and
excýýsable.
(2) Any person found guilty of an offence under the pro-
visions of this section shall be liable to be imprisoned for any
term not exceeding three years:
Provided always that a prosecution shal1 not be instituted
against any person under this section except by order of the
8 Court.
(3) For the purposes of this 'section, a person shall be
deemed not to have kept proper books of account if  he has
not kept such books or accounts as are necessary to exhibit
or explain his' transactions and financial position in his
trade, business or. profession, including a book or books con-
tainiýýg entries from day to day in sufficient detail of all cash
received and ca~h paid and, where the trade or business has
involved dealings in goods, alsa accounts of all goods sold
inclti<Ýing a  descriptioýý in sufficient detail ofall goods sold
and purchased whether forcaþh Qr çredit 1 as will enable such

70?AP.5.] BANKRUPTCY.. i
goodsto be identifiable and also particulars of the name and
raddress ot the supplier or purchaser of such goods, and state-
ments of ann~al stocktakings sho~ingthe basisliFon which
such stocktakl1)gs are made: ProVlded that a person engaged
in any retaýl trade in which it  would be a hardship or against
the usual custom of the trade to enter such details as are
hereinbefore required, then and in such cases, the omission
shall be deemed to be excusable.
(4) Paragraphs{d), (j), and (g) of section 116 of this Law
(which relate to the destruction, mutilation, and falsifýtation 8
and other fraudulent dealing with books and documents) ,
shali in their application to such books as aforesaid, have
effect as if "two years next before the presentation of the
bankruptcy petition" were substituted for the time men-
tioned in those paragraphs as the time prior to the presen-
fation within which the acts or omissions specifýed in those
paragraphs constitute an offence.
Ba.n
ltkruPft 123. (1) Any person who has been adjudged bankrupt,
guý yo .
fh..dhbdgambling. or ýn respect o w ose estate a recelVlng or er as een ma e,
ete. shal1 be guilty of an offence and on conviction thereof, liable
to be imprisoned for any term not exceeding three years,
if  having been engaged in any trade or business, and having
outstanding at the date of the receiving order any debts
contracted in the course and for the purposes of such trade or
business-
(a) he has, within two years priorto thepresentatio1) of
the bankruptcy petition, materially contributed
to or increased the exteýý.t ot his insolvency by
gambling or by rash and hazardous speculations,
and such gambling or speculations are uncon-
nected with his trade or business; or
i (b) he has, between the date of the presentation of the
petition and the date of the receiving order, lost
any part of his estate by such gambling or rash 8
and hazardolis speculations as aforesaid; or
(c) on being required by the official receiver at any time,
or in the course of his public examination by the
Court, to account for the lass of any substantial
part of his estate incurred within a  period of a
year next preceding the date of the presentation
of the bankruptcy petition, or between that date
date and the date of the receiving order, he fails
to give a  satisfactory explanation of thernaDiler
:.;::.. in-which such ioss was inclirred: ,:.. "   :.
\

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP.5. 711
-~
Provided that, in determining for the purposes of this .
section whether any speculations were rash and hazardous,
~the fýnancial. position of the ac.cused person at the t~me when
he entered mto thespeculatýons shall be taken mto con-
sideration.
(2) A prosecution sha11 not be instituted against any
person under this section except by order of the Court.
124. If any person who is adjudged bankrupt, or in Bankru~t
fht  t..dhbdabscondýng
8respect o w ose es a e a  receývmg or er as fen ma e, with
af ter the presentation of a bankruptcy petition by or against property.
him, or within six months before such presentation, quits
Cyprus and takes with him, or attempts or makes preparation
to quit Cyprus and take with him, any part of his property
to the amount of twenty pounds or upwards, which ought by
law to be divided amongst his creditors, he sha11 (unless he
proves that he had no inteni to defraud) be guilty of an
off~nce and on conviction thereof, be liable to be imprisoned
for any term not exceeding three years.
125. If, in the course of any proceedings taken under any Prosecution
bankruptcy petition or on the representation of the official of offences.
receiver, the trustfe, or of any creditor, it  appears to the
Court that there is reason to suppose that any person has
been guilty of an offence under this Law, the Court sha11, if it
appears to the Court that there is a reasonable probability
that the debtor will be convicted and that the circumstances
are such. as to render a prosecution desiralýle order the pro-
secution of such person accordingly and in any such case
inay order the person to be prosecuted into custody, if
preseni, or, if  not preseni, may grant a warrant for his arresi
and detention until he can be taken before a magistrate to
be dealt withaccording to law.
126. Where a debtor has been guilty ot a criminal offence, Çri~~al
8he shall not be exempt from being proceeded against therefor ~t~~ýzs-
by reason that he has obtained his discharge or that a com- charge?ý:
position or scheme of arraÝýgement has been accepted or composýtion.
approved.
FIRST SCHEDULE..
(Section 14.)
MEETINGS OF CREDITORS.
1. The fýrst meeting of creditors shall be summoned for a day not later
than fourteen days af ter the date of the receiving order, unless the Court
forany special reason deem it  expedient that the meeting be summoned
for alater day.

~2 C~~.5.~ BANKRUPTCY. i
2. The officialreceiver sha11 summon the meeting by giving not less than
rseven day";:' notice of the time and place thereof in the Gazette and in a
local paper.
3. The official receiver sha11 also, as soon as practicable, send to eaçh
creditor mentionedin the debtor's statement of affairs a notice of the time
and place of the first meeting of creditors, accompanied by a  summary
of the debtor's statement of affairs, including the cause of his failure, and
any observations thereon which theofficial receiver may think fit to make;
but the proceedings at the first meeting shall not be invalidated by reason
of any such notice or summary not having been sent or received before
the meeting.
4.. The ~eeting shall be h~ldat such pla~e ~ is in the op~ion of the 8
officýalreceýver most convenýent for the ma]onty of the creditors.
5. The official receiver or the trustee may at any time summon a meeting
of creditors, and shall do so whenever so directed by the Court, or so re-
quested in writing by one-fourth in value of the creditors.
6. Meetings subsequent to the first meeting shall be summoned by
sending notice of the time and place thereof to each creditor at the address
given in his proof, or if  he has notproved, at the address given in the
debtor's statement of affairs, or at such other address as may be known
to the person summoning the meeting.
7. The official receiver, or some person nominated by him, sha11 be the
chairman at the fýrst meeting. The chairman at subsequent meetings
shall be such person as the meeting by resolution appoint.
8. Aperson shall not be entitled to vote as a creditor at the first or any
other meeting of creditors unless he has duly proved a debt provable in
bankruptcy to be due to him from the debtor, and the proof has been duly
lodged before the time appointed for the meeting.
9. A  creditor sha11 not vote at any such meeting in respect of any un-
liquidated or contingent debt, or any debt the value of which is not
ascertained.
10. For the purpose of voting, a secured creditor sha11, unless he sur-
renders his security, state in his proof the particulars of his security, the
date when it was given,and the value at which he assesses it, and sha11 be
entitled to vote only in re~pect of the balance (if any) due to him af ter
deducting the value of his security. if  he votes in respect of his whole
debt he sha11 be deemed to have surrenderedhis security unless the Court
on application is satisfied that the omission to value the security has
arisen from inadvertence.
11. A  c~editor shall not vote in ~espect of any debt on, or secured by.a 8
current bill of exchange or promýs!?ory note held by hým, unless he ýs
willing to treat theliability to him thereon of every person who is liable
thereon antecedently to the debtor, and against whom a receiving order
has not been made, as a security in his hands, and to estimate the value
thereof, and for the purposes of voting, but not for the purposes of divi~
dend, to deduct it  from his proof.
12. It shall be competent to the trustee or to the official receiver,
within twenty~eight daysafter a proof estimating the value of a security as
aforesaid has been made use of in voting at any meeting, to require the
creditor to give up the security for the benefit of the creditors generallyon
paymeDt of the value so estimated, withan addition thereto of twenty per
centum: Provided, that where a  creditor has put a value on such security

BANK:RUPTCY" [CAP.. 5. 73 i
~
,
be may, at my time before h~has been ~equired to give up such security .
as aforesaid, correct such valuation by a  new proof, and deduct such
~new value from his debt, but in that case such addition of twenty per
centum shall not be made if the trustee requires the security to begiven up.
13. If a  receiving order is made against one partner of a  firm, any
creditor to whom that partner is indebted jointly with the other partners
of the firm, or any of them, may prove his debt for the purpose of voting i
at any meeting of creditors, and shall be entitled to vote thereat.
14. The Chairman of a  meeting shall have power to admit or reject
proof for the purpose of voting, but his decision shall be subject to the
-Conrto If  he is in doubt whether the proof of a creditor should be admitted
...or rejected he shall mark the proof as objected to, and shall allow the
creditor to vote, subject to the vote being declared invalid in the event of
the objection being sustained.
15. A creditor may vote either inperson or by proxy.
16. (1) Every instrument of proxy shall be in the prescribed form, and
shall be issued by the official receiver of the debtor's estate, or, af ter the
appointment of a  trustee, by the trustee, and every insertion therein
shall be in the handwriting of the person giving the proxy, or of any
manager or clerk or other pt:rson in his re~lar employment, or of any
commissioner of oaths.
(2) General and special forms of proxy shall be sent to the creditors,
together with a notice summoning a meeting of creditors, and neither the
name nor the description of the official receiver, or of any other person,
shall be printed or inserted in the body of any instrument of proxy before
it  is so sent.
(3) A  creditor may give a special proxy to any person to vote at any
specified meeting or adjournment thereof on all or any of the following
matters:-
(a) for or against any .specific proposal for a  composition or scheme
of arrangement;
(b) for or against the appointme~t of any specified person as trustee
at a specified rateor remuneration, or as member of the com-
mittee of inspection, or for or against the continuance in office
öfany specified person as trustee or member of a coýnmittee of
inspection ; -
(c) on all questions relating to any matter, otherthan those above
referred to, arising at any specified meeting or adjournment
8thereof.
17. A creditor may give a general proxy to his manager or clerk, or any
other person in his re~lar employment. In such case the instrument of
proxy shall state the relation in which the person to act therenDrler stands
to the creditor.
ýs. A proxy shall not be used unless it  is  deposited with the official
receiver or trustee before the meeting at which it  is to be used.
19. A creditor may appoint theofÝ'icial receiver of thedebtor's estate to
act in manýýer prescribed as his general or special proxy.
20. The chairman of a meeting may with the consent of the meeting,
adjoum the meeting from time to time, and from place to place.
21. A  meeting shall not be competent to act for any purpose, except

74 GAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY. i
the election of a chainnan, the proving of debts, and the adjournment of
rthe x:neeting, unless there. are ~resen~ or represented thereat, at least three
credýtors, or all the creditors ýf thelf number does not exceed three~
22. if  within half an hour from the time appointed for the meeting a
quorum of creditors is not present or represented, the meeting shall be
adjourned to the same day in the foijowing week at the same time and
place, or to suchother day as the chairman may appoint, not being less
than seven or more than twenty-one days.
23. The chaÝrman of every meeting shall cause minutes of the proceed-
ings at the ineetillg to be drawn up, and fairly entered in a bookkept for
that purpose, and the minutes shall be signed by hirn or by the chairman
8of the next ensuing meeting.
24. No person acting either under a general or special proxy shall vote
in favour of any resolution which would directly or indirectly place
himself, his partner or employer, in a position to receive any remuneration
o~t of the estate of the debtor otherwise than as a creditor rateably with
the other creditors of the debtor: Provided that where ariy person holds
special proxies to vote for the appointment ofhimself as a trustee he may
use the said prQxies and vote accordingly.
25. As soon as may be af ter a meeting of creditors, the official receiver
shall fýle in Court a copy of the minutes of proceedings and resolutions had
and taken at such meeting.
26. The vote of the trustee, or of his partner, clerk, advocate or
advocate's clerk, either as creditor or as proxy for a creditor, shall not be
reckoned in the majority required for passing any resolution affecting the
remuneration or conduct of the trustee.
SECOND SCHEDULE.
(Section 37.)
PROOF OF DEBTS.
Proof in Ordinary Cases.
1. Every creditor shall prove his debt as soon as may be af ter the
making of a receiving order.
2. A debt may be proved by delivering or sending through the post in a
prepaid letter to the official receiver, or, if  a trustee has been appointed, to
the trustee, an affidavit verifying the debt.
83. The affidavit may be made by the creditor himself, or by some person
authorized by or on behalf of the creditor. if  made by a person so autho-
rized, it  shall state his authority and means of knowledge.
4. The affidavit shall contain or refer to a statement of account showing
the particulars of the debt, and shall specify the vouchefs, if any ,by which
the same can be substantiated. The official receiver or trustee may at any
time call for the producti<;>n of the vouchefs.
5. The affidavit shall þtate whether the credit6r Ýs or is not a secured
creditor and if  it  is found at any time that the affidavit made by or on
behalf of a  secured creditor has oriýitted to state that he is a  secured
creditor, the secured creditor shall surrender his security to the official
receiver or trustee for the general benefýt of the creditors unless the Cöurt

B-ANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 75 i
~
on appIication is satisfied that the omission has arisen from inadvertence, -
and in that case the Court may allow the affidavit to be amended upon _
ýsuch tenns as to the repayment of any dividends or othe~se as the
Court may consider to be just.
6. A  creditor shall bear the cost of proving his debt, unless the Court
othe~se specially orders.
7. Every creditor who has lodged a proof shall be entitled to see and
examine the proofs of other creditors before the first meeting, and at all
reasonable times.
8. A creditor proving his debt shall deduct therefrom all trade discounts,
but he shall not be compelled to deduct any discount, not exceeding five
..per centum on the net amount of his claim, which he may have agreed to
..allow for payment in cash.
Proof by Secured Credilorso
9. if a  secured creditor realizes his security, he may prove for the
balance due to him, af ter deducting the net amount realized.
10. if  a secured creditor surrenders his security to the otfýcial receiver
or trustee for the general heDefit of the creditors, he may prove for his
whole debt.
11. if  a secured creditor does not either realize or surrender his security,
he shall, before ranking for dividend, state in his proof the particulars of
his security, the date when it was given, and the value at which he assesses
it, and shall be entitled to receive a dividend only in respect of the balance
due to him af ter deducting the value so assessed.
12. (1) Where a security is so valued the trustee may at any time redeem
it  on payment to the creditor of the assessed value.
(2) if  the trustee is dissatisfied with the value at which a  security is
assessed, he may require that the property comprised in any security so
valued be offered for sale at such times and on such tenns and conditions
as may be agreed on between the creditor and the trustee, or as, in default
of such agreement, the Court may direct. if  the sale be by pubIic auction
the creditor, or the trustee on behalf of the estate, may bid or purchase:
Provided that the creditor may at any time, by notice in writing
require the trustee to elect whether he wi1l or wi1l not exercise his power of
redeeming the security or requiring it  to be realized, and if  the trustee
does not, within six months af ter receiving the notice, signify in writing
to the creditor his election to exercise the power, he shall not be entitled
to exercise it; and the equity of redemption, or any other interest in the
property comprised in the security which is vested in the truste~, shall
8vest in the creditor, and the amount of his debt shall be reduced by the
amount at which the security has been valued.
13. Where a  creditor has so valued his security, he may at any time
amend the valuation and proof on showing to the satisfaction of the trustee,
or the Court, that the valuation and proof were made bana fide on a
mistaken estimate, or that the security has diminished or increased in
value since its previous valuation; but every such amendment shall be
made at the cost of the creditor, and upon such tenns as the Court shall
order, unless the trustee shall allow the amendment without appIication
to the Court.
14. Where a valuation has been amended in accordance with the fore-
going rnle, the creditor shall forthwith repay any surplus dividend which
c. i

~~ CAP. 5.] BANKRUPTCY.. i
he may have received in excess of that to which he wonld have been ~
entitled on the amended valuation, or, as the case may be, shall be entitled
rto be paid out of any money for the time being available for dividend any
dividend or share of dividend which he may have fai1ed to receive by
reason of the inaccuracy of the original valuation, before that money is
made applicable to the payment of any future dividend, but he shall not
be entitled to disturb the distribution of any dividend declared before
the date of the amendment.
f15. if  a  creditor af ter having valued his security subsequently realizes
it, or if it  is  realized under the provisions of rnle 1Z, the net amount
realized shall be substituted for the amount of any valuation previously
l made ý;>y the creditor, and s~all be treated in all respects as an amended
Ý-r valuatýon made by the .creditor. ..i 
16. if  a secured creditor does ~ot comp~y. wýth the foregoýng rnles, hei 
s\ýall be excluded from all share ýn any dývýdend.
L 17. Subject to the provisions of rule 1Z, a  creditor shall in no case, 
receive more than twenty shillings in the pound, and interest as provided: 
by this Law.:
Proof in respect of Distinct Contracts.
18. if  a debtor was at the date of the receiving order liable in respect of
distinct contracts as a member of two or more distinct fýrms, or as a sole
contractor, and also as a  member of a  fýrm, the circumstance that the
fýrms are in whole or in part composed of the same individuals, or that the
sole contractor is also one of the joint contractors, shall not prevent proof
in respect of the contracts, against the properties respectively liable on
the contracts.
Periodical Payments.
19. Where any rent or other payment falls due at stated periods, and
the receiving order is made at any time other than one of those periods,
the person entitled to the rent or payment may prove for a proportionate
part thereof up to the date of the order as if  the rent or payment grew due
from day to day.
Interest.
zo. On any debt or sum certain, payable at a certain time or otherwise,
whereon interest is not reserved or agreed for, and which is overdue at
the date of the receiving order and provable in bankruptcy, the creditor
may prove for interest at a rate not exceeding nine per centum per annum
to the date of the order from the time when the debt or sum was payable,
.i~ the debt ?r sum is payable ~y virtue of a writte~ instrement at a cert~n
8tIme, and ýf payable otherwýse, then from the týme when a  demand ýn
writing has been made giving the debtor notice that interest will be claimed
from the date of the demand unill the time of payment.
Zl. On any debt or sum certain, payable at a certain time or otherwise,
whereon interest is not reserved or agreed for, and which is overdue at the
date of the receiving order and provable in bankruptcy, the creditor may
prove for interest at a rate not exceeding four per centum per annum to
the date of the ord~r from the time when the debt or sum was payable, if
the debt or sum is payable by virtue of a written instrement at a certain
time, and if  payable otherwise, then from the time when a demand in
writing has been made giving the debtor notice that interest will be
claimed from the date of the demand until the time of payment.

BANKRUPTCY. [CAP. 5. 77 ~
Debt payable at a Furtlýer Time. .
22. A  creditor may prove for a debt not payable when the debtor com..
~mitted an act of bankruptcy as if it were payable presently, and may
receive dividends equally with the other creditors, deducting only thereout
a rebate of interest at the rate of nine pounds per centum per annum
computed from the declaration of a dividend to the time when the debt :
would have become payable, according to the terms on which it W3.s
contracted.
Admission or Rejection of Proofs.
23. The trustee shall examine every proof and the grounds of the debt,
8and in writing admit or reject it, in whole or in part, or require further
evidence in support of it. if  he rejects a proof he shall state in writing to
the creditor the grounds of the rejection.
24. if  the trustee thinks that a proof has been improperly admitted,
the Court may, on the application of the trustee, af ter notice to the
creditor who made the proof, expunge the proof or reduce its amount.
25. if  a creditor is dissatisfied with the decision of the trustee in respect
of a proof, the Court may, on the application of the creditor, reverse or
vary the decision.
26. The Court may also expunge or reduce a proof upon the application
of a creditor if  the trustee declines to interfere in the matter, or in the case
of a  composition or scheme, upon the application of the debtor.
27. For the purpose of any of his duties in relation to proofs, the trustee
may administer oaths and take affidavits.
28. The official receiver, before the appointment of a trustee, shall have
all the powers of a trustee with respect to the examination, admission, and
rejection of proofs, and any act or decision of his in relation thereto shall
be subject to the like appealo
8
i  (2)