

8 CAP. 50. i
~
TYPRUS
8
DISPLA Y OF ADVERTISEMENTS
CHAPTER so OF THE LAW S
1959 EDITION
.
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV, LONDON, W.1.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959
c. i 1

e i
,
CHAPTER 50. ~-"-=
DISPLA Y OF ADVERTISEMENTS.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title ..0 ...0.0 000 o'. 2
2 Interpretation ..0 00. 2
83 Application of Law... o.' ...o.' 3
4 Control of erection of hoardings and display of advertisements 00. 4
5 Hoardings may be erected in specified places 0 4
6 Advertisements relating to business, etc. 5
7 Municipal Councils may make bye-Iaws and impose charges o.. 6
8 The Governor in Council may make Regl,ilations and an Improvement
Board may make bye-Iaws ..0 .00 ...7
9 Control of advertisements to be exercised in the interests of amenity
and public safety ...o.. ...000 8
10 Consideration of applications ..0 0 8
11 Refusal of application 0 o.' 9
12 Exemption of official notices, etc. 0.0 00. ...9
13 Provisions of Streets and Buildings Regulation Law not to apply ...9
14 Oflences and penalties o.' 00. 00. ..0 9
15 Saving ..0 '0' .0. ýo
A LAW TO MAKE FURTHER AND BETTER PROVISION FOR THE
CONTROL OF THE DISPLA Y OF ADVERTISEMENTS.
33 of 57. [30th N ovember, 1957. J
Short titleo 1. This Law may be cited as the Display of Advertise-
ments (Control) Law.
I~terpreta- 2. In this Law, unless the context otherwise requires-
týon. "  advertisement 'I includes any word, letter, model,
sign, placard, board, notice, bill, poster, device or
representation, whether illuminated or not, in the
nature of, and employed wholly or in part for the
purpos~ of advertisement! announcement or direction
8(excludýng any such thýng employed wholly as a
memoria!) , and, without prejudice to the foregoing
provision, includes also any hoarding or similar
structure, whether fýxed or movable, used or adapted
for use for the display of advertisemeIÝts and references
to the display of advertisements shall be construed
accordingly;
"  Council" means the municipa! council Qf a
municipal corporation;
"  hoarding" means any board, panel or structure

18 -:--- Display of Ad~ertisements. [CAP. 50.3_. i
erected in order that space upon it  may be used for the
display of advertisements;
II Improvement Board" means a  Board established
in an Improvement Area under the provisions of the
Villages (Administration and Improvement) Law; Cap.243.
II Improvement Area "  has the meaning assigned to'
it in section 2 of the Villages (Administration and -\
Improvement) Law;
~- II land" includes buildings and land covered with
., water.
3. (1) This Law shall apply to the display on land in Af~catiOD
the Colony of all advertisements, except any advertise- o w.
ment-
(a) relating to any service in a church, chapel, or
mosque (including any advertisement relating
to funeral services) ;
(b) relating to an election held or to be held in the
Colony or any area thereof under any Law
for the time being in force;
(c) displayed on enclosed land, and not readily visible
from land outside the enclosure wherein it is
displayed or from any part of such enclosure
over which there is a  public right of way or to
which there is public right of access;
(d) displayed within a  building and not readily visible
from outside such building;
(e) displayed within the ground floor window of a
shop;
(f) displayed on or in a  vehicle;
(g) incorporated in, and forming part of, the fabric of a
building, other than a  building used principally
-for the display of such advertisements or a
., hoarding or similar structure;
(h) displayed under the provisions of any other Law
or public instrumeni for the time being in force.
(2) For the purposes of this section-
II enclosed land "  rn,eans land which is wholly or for
the most part enclosed within a  hedge, fence, wall or
similar screen or structure, and for the avoidance of
doubt shall be deemed to incinde an open-air cine-
matograph theatre;
il (2)

4 GAP. 50.] Display of Advertisements. :o i
ýý vehicle "  means a  vehicle normally employed as a
moving vehicle on any road.
(3) No advertisement shall be deemed to be displayed
within a  building or within the window of a shop unless
there is full access to the advertisement from inside the
building or the shop.
(4) No advertisement shall be deemed to form part of
the fabric of a  building by reason only of being affýxed to,
or painted on, the building. 8
Control of
4NhIIerection of .O person s  a  -.
hoa
drdd~ngýs (a) erect, or cause to be erected, or authorize the
an ýsp ay .
fhdi.dof advertise- erectýon O any oar ng except ýn accor ance
ments. with the provisions of section 5  or section 6; or
(b) display or cause to be displayed any advertisements
to which this Law applies except (i) upon a
hoarding lawfully erected in accordance with
the provisions of section 5  or (ii) in accordance
with the provisions of section 6.
Hoar~ings 5. (1) Within the area of a  municipal corporation the
:~ted in Council may erect, or cause to be erected, or authorize the
syecifýed erection in specified places of, hoardings on which advertise-
p aces. ments may be displayed.
(2) In relation to any hoarding erected or caused to be
erected or of which the erection is authorized under sub-
section (1) the Council shall have power to specify the
period during which such hoarding shall remain erected or
any advertisement shall be displayed thereon and, without
prejudice to any powers conferred upon the Council by this
Law or any bye-laws made thereunder, to impose conditions
as regards the proper maintenance of such hoardings or
advertisements.
(3) Within an Improvement Area the Improvement 8
Board may erect, or cause to be erected, hoardings on which
advertisements may be displayed.
(4) In relation to any hoarding erected or caýýsed to be
erected under subsection (3) the Improvement Board shall
have power to specify the period during which such hoarding
shall remain erected or any advertisement shall be displayed
thereon and, without prejudice to any powers conferred
upon the Improvement Board by this Law or any bye-laws
made thereunder, to impose conclitiOfis as regards the
proper maintenance of such hoardings or advertisements.

8 Display of Advertisements.8 [GAP. 50. 5 i
6. (1) It  shall be lawful for any person, within the area Adv~rtise- .
of a municipal corporation with the approval of the Council, ~~i~: :~- II
or elsewhere with the approval of the Commissioner, or, b;siness,
within an Improvement Area of the Improvement Board, e c.
but not otherwise, to display upon his own land or upon
any land in his occupation or use, or where he is working,
whether upon a hoarding or otherwise, advertisements
(hereinafter in this section referred to as ýý point of sale
advertisements ") directly relating to any business, pro-
8 jession, trade or work carried on upon such land:
Provided that-
(a) any point of sale advertisement so displayed shall
not be suspended across a street;
(b) any point of sale advertisement so displayed shall
not be suspended or projected outwards into a
street if  the height of the lower portion of such
advertisement is less than twelve feet above the
level of the street;
(c) any point of sale advertisement so displayed, the
lower portion of which is not less than twelve
feet above the level of the street, shall not be
suspended or projected outwards into the street
a distance of more thin two feet.
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the Council,
the Commissioner or the Improvement Board, as the cage
may be, may approve or reflise to approve the display of
any point of sale advertisement under this section, and in
approving the display of any such advertisement the
Council, the Commissioner or the Improvement Board, as
the cage may be, shall, without prejudice to any other
powers conferred under this Law or any bye-Iaws or
regulations made thereunder, have power to impose con-
ditions relating to the display and proper maintenance of
8 such point of sale advertisement.
(3) Notwithstanding anything containedin subsections (1)
and (2) of this section, no approval of the Council or of
the Commissioner or of the Improvement Board shall be
required in respect of the display of any point of sale
advertisement which fulfýls the requirements of paragraphs
(a), (b) and (c) of the proviso to subsection (1) of this
section if.--
(a) it  is so displayed as to be directly attached to, or
affixed on, any buildings belonging to, or in the

6 GAP. 50.] .Display of Advertisements. e i
occupation or use of, the person displaying the .
advertisement, or where he is working, and in ii
which he carries on the business, profession,
trade, or work to which the advertisement
directly relates; and
(b) it does not, by itself or along with one or more
other point of sale advertisements, occupy an
area more than one-fýfth of the overall area of
the face of the building to which it  is attached
or on which it  is affixed taken up to a  height of
8fýfteen feet from ground level, the area so
occupied being computed as if  the said advertise-
ment or advertisements, howsoever attached or
affixed, was or were displayed fiat against the
face of the building; and
(c) it  is not more than fýfteen feet above ground level.
M
cunic!Pýaý 7. (1) Within the area of a  munioipal corporation the
ouncý s
C.
may make ouncýl may make bye-laws-
~~~-~~~sose .(a) for the imposition of charges in connection with the
charges. display of advertisements on hoardings erected
or caused to be erected by the Council under the
provisions of section 5  of this Law;
(b) for the imposition of charges in connection with the
erection of hoardings authorized by the Council
under the provisions of section 5  of this Law;
(c) for regulating the size and form of hoardings the
erection of which is authorized by the Council
under the provisions of section 5  of this Law;
(d) for regulating the size and form of advertisements
displayed within the area of a municipal
corporation under the provisions of section 5
or section 6  of this Law;
(e) for regulating the procedure of applying for and
authorizing the erection of hoardings and the 8
display of advertisements thereon within the
area of a  municipal corporation under the pro-
visions of section 5  of this Lawand of applying
for and approving the display of advertisements
within the area of a municipal corporation under
section 6  of this Law;
(f) for prescribing penalties of a fýne not exceeding
twenty-fýve pounds for any breach of the bye-
laws and of a further fýne not exceeding fýve
pounds for every day during whioh such breach

8 DisplayofAdvertisements. [CAP.50. 7 i
-"
is continued af ter the conviction of the offender
and for providing that in the event of any
person persistently committing a  breach of the
bye-laws the Court may at the request of the
Council authorize the forfeiture and confýscation
of the offending advertisement or hoarding.
(2) Every bre-law made by any Council under this Law
shall be subject to the approval of the Governor and shall
8not come into force until it shall have been approved by
him and published in the Gazette.
8. (1) Elsewhere than within the area of a  municipal ýhe .
coýporation the Governor in Council may make Regulations, c~::~~o~:
and within an Improvement Area the Improvement Board m
ita.ke Reg
du-
a ýons an
may make bye-laws- an Improve-
(fh...fh...ththment Board
a) or t   e  ýmposýtýon o c arges ýn connectýon wl e may make
display of advertisements displayed on hoardings bye-Iaws.
erected or caused to be erected by an Improve-
ment Board under the provisions of section 5
of this Law;
(b) for regulating the size and form of advertisements
displayed under the provisions of section 5 or
section 6  of this Law;
(c) for regulating the procedure of applying for the
display of advertisements under the provisions
of section 5  of this Lawand of applying for and
approving the display of advertisements under
the provisions of section 6  of this Law;
(d) for prescribing penalties of a fýne not exceeding
twenty-fýve pounds for any breach of the
Re~lations or bye-laws and of a  further fýne not
exceeding fýve pounds for every day during
which such breach is continued af ter the con-
8viction of the offender and for providing that in
the event of any person persistently committing
a breach of the Regulations or bye-laws the
Court may at the request of the Commissioner
or an Improvement Board authorize the for-
feiture and confýscation of the offending adver-
tisement or hoarding.
(2) Every bre-law made by an Improvement Board
under this Law shall be subject to the approval of the
Governor and shall not come into force until it shall have
been approved by him and published in the Gazette.

8 CAP.50.] DisplayofAdvertisements. G i
, .
~n~~ of 9. (1) The powers conferred by this Law in respect of i
~e:~s ~~-be the erection of hoardings and the display of advertisements II
ethxer.citsed intshall be exercisable only in the interests of amenity and
eýneress .
of amenity public safety.
and public
safety. (2) When exercising such powers the Council or the
Commissioner or the Improvement Board, as the case may
be-
(a) shall, in the interests of amenity, determine the
suitability of the site for the erection of ho ard- 8
ings for the display of advertisements under the
provisions of this La w  in the light of the general
characteristics of the locality, particularly the
presence therein of any feature of historic,
architectural, cultural, scenic or similar interest;
and when assessing the general characteristics
of a locality the Council or the Commissioner
or the Improvement Board, as the cage may be,
may disregard any advertisements therein
aIready being displayed;
(b) shall, in the interests of public safetr, have regard
to the safety of persons who may use any road
affected or likely to be affected by the erection
of any hoarding or the display of any advertise-
ment; and shall in particular consider whether
any such hoarding or advertisement is likely-
(i) to obscure or hinder the ready interpreta,.
tion of any road traffic sign; or
(ü) to obstruct the sight line of any bend,
comer or road junction; or
(iii) to take the attention of drivers of vehicles
away from a  road at any point where special
attention is required,
but without prejudice to their powers to have regard to any
8other material factor.
C;onsidera- ýo. Where an application is made to the Council or the
~;~i~~tions. Commissioner or the Improvement Board, as the case may
be, in pursuance of the provisions of this Lawand no
decision on such application is made by the Council or the
Commissioner or the Improvement Board, as the case may
be, within a period of two months from the receipt of such
application, or within such extended period or periods as
hereinafter provided, such application shall be deemed for
all purposes to have been refused at the expiration of such

8 Display of Advertisements, [CAP. 50.3- i
period or the last of such extended periods but without i
prejudice to the right of the applicant to renew his II
application : i
.' Provided that the period of two months may, with the
consent of the applicant, be extended for such further
period or periods as the Council or the Commissioner or the
Improvement Board, as the cage may be, may consider
necessary in any particular cage.
811. Where a  Council or a  Commissioner or an Improve- Refu
ý.salt.of
app ýca ýon.
ment Board, as the cage may be, refuses to grant any
application made under the provisions of this Law or of any
bye-Iawor Regulation made thereunder, or grants any such
application subject to conditions, the Council or the Com-
missioner or the Improvement Board, as the cage may be,
shall give the applicant notice in writing ot the refusal, or
of the conditions imposed, as the cage may be, setting out
the grounds for such refusal or for imposing such conditions,
and any person aggrieved by any decision of a Council
or of a  Commissioner or of an Improvement Board in the
exercise of its or his powers in the erection of hoardings or
the display of advertisement under the provisions of this
Law or of any bye-Iaw or Regulation made thereunder may,
within twenty-one days from the date of the communication
to him of such notice, appeal to the Governor in Council,
whose decision shall be final and conclusive.
12. Nothing in this Law shall apply to notices displayed Efxe:p~on
by any Department of the Government of the Colony, or by :o~ce~. etc.
any Military or Naval or Air Force authority, or by any
judicial authority, or by any municipal or other local
authority.
13. The provisions of the Streets and Buildings Regula- Provisions
.
LfLdinb.dfhof Streets
8týon aw, or o any aw amen g  or su stýtute or t   e  and Build-
same, shall not apply to the erection of any hoarding under iý:ýgs Regula-
h..f   h,Lh.h.dfhItion Law t   e provýsýons o t  ýs aw w ýc ýs use or t  e so e purpose not to
of displaying advertisements thereon and for no other apply.
Cap. 96.
purpose.
14. (I) Any person who erects or causes to be erected or Oflences
authorizes the erection of any hoarding or who displays or ~~alties.
causes to be displayed any advertisement in contravention
of the provisions of this Law shall be guilty of an offence
and shall be liable on conviction to a  fine not exceeding
twenty-five pounds, and to a  further fine not exceeding~

.10 CAP. 50.J Display of Advertisements. O i
fýve pounds for every day during which the contravention i
is  continued af ter his conviction thereof and Ýn the event of II
any person persistently contravening the provisions of this
Law, the Court may at the request of a  Council or a  Com-
missioner or an Improvement Board, as the case may be,
authorize the forfeiture and confýscation of the offending
advertisement or hoarding :
(2) All fýnes recovered under this Law or any bye-laws
made thereunder for offences committed withÝn the area of
8a  municipal corporation shall be paid to the town fund of
the municipal corporation concerned.
Saving. 15. Any bye-laws or Regulations made under the Placards
1949 Cap. and Advertisements Regulation Law which are in force
135. immediately before the date of the coming into operation
of this Law shal1, as from that date and until other bye-laws
or Regulations are made under this Law, be deemed to be
bye-laws or Regulations made under this Lawand shall,
with any necessary modifýcations, have effect accordingly.
8
\  .