

1
8 CAP. 52..
,
!
CYPRUS
8
DOCS
CHAPTER 52. OF THE LAW S
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54. GRAFTON WAV. LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959
ký (2)

2 CAP. 52.) DOGS.
eI,-;C ,i ,
,
CHAPTER 52.
DOGS.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title 2
2 Interpretation 2
83 Application of Law... 3
4 Licence to keep dog , 3
5 Refusal of licence in certain cases 3
6 Badges 4
7 OfIences and penalty 5
8 Destruction of unlicensed dogs. etc. , 5
9 Stray dogs 6
ýo Trapping 7
11 Saving... 7
FIRST SCHEDULE.
Licence 8
SECOND SCHEDULE.
Licensing fees 8
THIRD SCHEDULE.
Notice under section 9 0 9
A LAW TO CONSOLIDATE AND AMEND THE LAW RELATING TO
THE LI{:ENSING AND CONTROL OF DOGS IN ALL PLACES
IN THE COLONY.
310/55. [Stk August, 1955.]
Short title. ý. This Law may be cited as the Dogs Law.
I~terpreta- 2. In this Law, unless the context otherwise requires-
týon. "  appropriate authority "  means-
(a) in anyarea of a  municipal corporation the muni-
cipal council of such corporation or any
person appointed or authorized in that behalf
8by such council;
(b) in an improvement area the Board established for
such area under the Villages (Administration
Cap. 243 and Improvement) Law, or any person appoint-
ed or authorized in that behalf by such Board;
(c) in all other places the mukhtar of the quarter
or yillage ;
"  authorized person" means any person appointed
by the appropriate authority to exercise powers and
perform duties under the provisions of the Law;
,-,

e DOGS. [CAP .52. 3 i
ýý cattle" includes horses, mules, donkeys, goats, .
sheep and swine ; Iý
ýý dog" includes bitch but does not include an i
unweaned puppy ;
ýý owner ", in relation to a  dog, includes any person
by whom the dog is being kept ;
c. prescribed "  means prescribed by the appropriate
authority by notice in the Gazette.
8ýc stray dog" means a dog found wandering on a
public road or in any other place to which the public
ha~ access without proper control and creating a
nuýsance ;
3. The provisions of this Law shall apply to all places in Application
the Colony. of Law.
4. (1) No person shall keep a dog unless he has obtained a Licence to
licence in that behalf from the appropriate authority in the keep dog.
form set out in the First Schedule. ~Ý:::dule
(2) Every licence sha11 expire on the 31st day of December
in the year in which it is issued.
(3) There shall be paid into the Fund or revenue of the
appropriate authority for every licence the fees set out in the
Second Schedule. Second
Schedule.
(4) The appropriate authority shall keep a register
specifying the name, address andoccupation of each person
to whom, and the number or class of dogs in respect of
which, a  licence is issued.
(5) Where the holder of any licence issued under this
section sells or parts with the ownership of the dog in respect
of which the liçence was issued to any other person, such
licence may, on the joint application of such holder and of
8 such other person, be transferred by endorsement thereon
to the name of such other person for the unexpired period
thereof, and no fee shall be charged in respect of any such
transfer.
5. (1) The appropriate authority may refuse to grant ~efusal.of
a licence to any person or may withdraw any licence gran!ed ~~=~ ~~ses.
to any person to keep a dog for any ot the followýng
reasons :-
(a) that the dog is shown to be dangerous to members of

4 GAP. 52.] DOGS. 8 i
the public or to cattle or domestÝc anÝmals, or i
Ýs a public nuisance ; II
(b) that the person who has applied for a  licence has i
been convicted of an offence under the Cruelty
Cap.47. to AnÝmals Law or any Law amending or
substituted for the same ;
(c) that the dog is kept under conditions which are
dangerous to public health.
(2) Any person whose licence to keep a dog has been
refused or withdrawn shall forthwith deliver such dog to the 8
appropriate authority for disposal or destruction by the
said authority in such manner as may be prescribed, and,
if  he fails so to do, such dog may be seized and detained for
such disposal or destruction :
Provided that no such dog shal1 be disposed of or
destroyed until the expiration of seven days from such
refusal or withdrawal of the litence or, in the cage of an
appeal to the CommÝssioner, unill his decision thereon has
been given upholding the decision of the appropriate autho-
rity to refuse the grant or withdrawal of the licence.
(3) Any person aggrieved by-
(a) the refusal of the appropriate authority to grant a
licence ;
(b) the withdrawal of a licence,
may, within seven days from the date of such refusal or
withdrawal, appeal in writing to the CommissÝoner and shall,
within the period aforesaid, serve a  copy of the appeal on
the appropriate authority.
(4) The decision of the Commissioner on any such appeal
shall be final.
Badges. 6. (1) The appropriate authority shall supply the
licensee, free of charge, with a badge to be worn by the dog
8for which the litence is issned.
(2) li it is proved to the appropriate authority that a
badge supplied under the provisions of subsection (1)
has been lost or destroyed, the appropriate authority shall,
upon payment of 50 mils, issue to the licensee a  duplicate
badge.
(3) The licensee shall return such badge to the
appropriate authority if  he teases to keep the dog in respect
of which the badge has been issned, or if  the dog dies during
the currency of the licence.

8 ~ DOGS: [GAP .52.5 i
(4) Every licensee shall, within a  reasonable time af ter i
demand, produce his litence for inspection by any person IÝ
authorized by the appropriate authonty or by any member ,
of the Cyprus Police Force.
7. (1) Any person who- Oflences and
.penalty.
(a) keeps a dog wýthout a licence ;
(b) keeps a  dog in contravention of any section of this
Law;
8 (c) does any act with intent to, or which is likely to,
defraud the appropriateauthority in the registra-
tion or control of dogs in pursuance of this Law;
(d) within any municipal or improvement area causes
or allows a bitch white in heat to be on any
public road or in any place to which the public
have access or on any premises other than the
premises on which the bitch is being kept or
is for the time being allowed to remain, unless
the bitch is on a  leash and.is under control;
(e) within a  municipal or' improvement area permits,
suffers or a1lows his dog to wander or be found
in public places or on a public road without
proper control and in circumstances which
make it  a nuisance ; .
(f) within a  municipal ör improvement area permits,
suffers or allöws his dog or any dog for which he
is for the time being responsible, to make a
noise by barking which is so loud and so COD-
tinuous or repeated as to cause a  nuisance to
occupants or inmates of any premises in the
n~ighbourhood, .
sha1l be guilty of an offence again5:t this Lawand shall be
8 liable to a fine not exceeding twenty-five pounds.
.8. Subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of section 5, Dest~ction
every dog-':' of unlýcensed
dogs. ete.
(a) f6und wandering within any place in the Colony
not wearing a badge in the prescribed form; or
(b) in respect of which a  litence has been refused or
withdrawn,
..
may be seized and disposed of in such manýýer as may be
prescribed or -' subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of;

6 CAP. 52J DOGS. G i
section 9, destroyed by the Chief Veterinary Offýcer or by
such person as the appropriate authority may prescribe.
Stray dogs. 9. (1) Any stray dog found anywhere in the Colony other
than in a yillage area sha11 be seized and detained in
accordance with the provisions of this section by any
authorized person who shall forthwith report such detention
to the appropriate authority and thereupon the following
provisions shall apply, that is to say :-
(a) (i) .In the case of a  dog wearing i~s badge or ?f ~ dog 8
not weanng a badge but whose owner ýs known or ýs likely
to be easily found, the appropriate authority shall cause
Third a  notice to be sent to the registered or likely owner in the
Schedule. form and to the effect set out in the Third Schedule.
(ii) Within fonT days from the giving of the notice, unless
in the meantÝme the dog is claÝmed and the charges in
respect thereof in accordance with the notice are paid
(hereinafter referred to as II the statutory charge ") as
published in the Gazette from time to time, the appropriate
authority may cause the dog to be disposed of or destroyed
in such manýýer as may be prescribed.
(iii) Where a  dog has been disposed of or destroyed in
pursuance of the last foregoing sub-paragraph the owner
of the dog shall be liable to pay to the appropriate authority
the statutory charge accruing in respect of the detention
of the dog and also, where the dog has been destroyed as
aforesaid, the amount of any expenses in respect of its
destruction :
Provided that where the dog has been disposed of in
pursuance of the last foregoing subsection the amount of
the proceeds of the sale shall be set off against the amount
of the statutory. charge falling to be paid to the appropriate
authority, so, however, that where the amount of the
proceeds of the sale exceeds the am~unt of the statutory 8
charges the surplus shall not be paýd to the owner but
sha11 be paid to the funds of the appropriate authority.
(iv) All sums which fall to be paid by any person to the
appropriate authority under this Law shall be recoverable
in the form of civil action at the suit of the appropriate
authority.
(b) In the cage of a  dog not wearing its badge and whose
owner is not known or likely to be easily found, the dog
shall be detained for a  period of not less than 48 hours

e DOGS. [CAP. 52.:,.., "7 i
af ter which if  the dog is stilI unclaimed it  shall be disposed
of or destroyed in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection
(1) every stray dog found in the Colony anywhere other than
in a  municipal or improvement area not wearing a  bage
in the prescribed form may be destroyed by shooting by
any member of the Cyprus Police Force authorized in this
respect by the Chief Constable, or by such other person
as may be authorized by the Goveroor. No comrengation
8?hall be payable ~n respec~ of the destruction of a dog
ýn pursuance of thýs subsectýon.
10. (1) In this section the expression II approved trap" Trapping.
means a  trap of such nature and construction as to satisfy
the Chief Veterinary Officer that its use \vilI not cause
physical pain or suffering to any dog captured thereby or
coming into contact therewith.
(2) It shall be lawfu! for the appropriate authority
and the Chic: Constable, or for any person authorized
by them to acý under subsection (1), to cause approved
traps, as may be prescribed, to be placed and set or used for
the purpose of capturing stray or unlicensed dogs in Cyprus.
(3) Any dog captured by means of an approved trap
shall, for the purposes of subsection (1) of section 9, be
deemed to be a  stray dog.
11. Any licence granted under any of the Laws hereby Sayingo
repealed shall, until expired or cancelled, be deemed to
have been granted under the provisions of this Law.
8
[SCHEDULE
,

8 CAP. 52.] , .DOGS. :o i
FIRST SCHEDULE. ~
(Section 4 (1).)
LI.CENCE.
No. of Badge No.
ApPROPRIATE AUTHORITY OF THE.YILLAGE!THE VILLAGE HEALTH AREA/
THE IMPROVEMENT AREA/THE MUNICIPAL AREA OF .
Licence is hereby granted to 8
of to keep the following dog :-
Sex
Colour
Distinguishing marks (if any)
Breed or type
FEE PAID.
This licence expires on the 31st day of December, 19 .
Dated the day of , 19
Signature and Seat of the Appropriate Authority.
Renewedon to expire on 31st December, 19
Signature and Seat of the A ppropriate A uthority.
.
'SECONDSCHEDULE.
(Section 4 (3).)
LICENSING FEES UNDER SECTION 4  (3).
Dog. Bitch. Spayed
bitch.
8mils mils mils
1. Municipal areas 350 750 350
2. Villages where the Villages (Adminis-
tration and Improvement) Law
apply 350 750 350
3. Villages other than those referred to
in item 2 above 150 300 150
Provided that, where the appropriate authority is the mukhtar, out
of the fee paralýle the mukhtar shall retain a  fee of one shilling in
respect of every licence issued by him.

8., .,. DOGS. [CAP.52.
I THIRD SCHEDULE. i
(Section 9.) IÝ
NOTICE UNDER SECTION 9. i
To .
Please take notice that a dog/bitch coloured , breed
and wearing the prescribed badge No. /not wearing a badge has
been seized and detained as a stray dog under and by virtue of the Dögs
Law, Gap. 52, and is liable to destruction or disposa!, within four days from
8the service of this notice, unless in the meantime yon claim it and payall
legal charges for its detention.
In any event yon will be liable to pay the lega! charges for the main-
tenance of the dog as laid down in section 9 (a) (ii) for four days from the
notice hereof and all expenses incurred in the destruction thereof.
(Sgd.)
The Appropriate Authority.
*  The Laws repea!ed by this Laware--
1. Municipa! Gorporations Law (Gap. Sections 123 (1) (g}, 175 to 181
252 and Laws 11 of 1950, 31 of 1951, (both inclusive).
20 of 1953, 29 of 1954, 57 of 1954
and 14 of 1955).
2. Vi1lages ~Adrninistration and Im- Section 21 (da) and (j).
provement) Laws, 1950 and 1953.
3. Dogs Law {Gap.. 81). , The whole.
..
* This Law came into operation on the lst January, 1956 (55 Vol. .II,
706).
8