

8. CAP. 56. i
CYPRUS
Ý-
i
FAMACUST A IMPROVEMENT
CHAPTER 56 OF THE LAW S
1959 EDITION
/Ý-
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV. LONDON, W.I.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Editian
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colanial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959

2. ...,. CAP.56.] FAMAGUSTA IMPROVEMENT. :9 i
~
CHAPTER 56.
F AMAGUST A IMPROVEMENT.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title. 000 ...000 00' ..0 2
82 Interpretation .0' '0' '0' 000 2
3 Plans. 000 '0' 000 000 00. 2
4 Deposit of plans 0.0 000 000 o.. 3
5 Objections, how made .00 ..0 '00 .0.. 3
6 Submission and revision ofplans 000 000 o" 3
7 Powers with regard to laying out town 000 000 "0 3
8 Assessment 000 000 000 0'0 .00 4
9 Borrowing powers 000 000 00' o.. 4
10 Repayment of expenses incurred in laying out town 000 000 4
11 Charge on owners o.. 00. 000 000 5
12 Appeaý to District Court 00. 00. 000 000 5
13 Proceedings in default of payment of improvement chargeo 000 5
14 Power to appoint a  person to act where Municipaýity makes default 5
15 Enforcing obedience to orders of Municipality o o. O' o 5
To PROVillE FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE TOWN
OF FAMAGUSTA.
1949 Cap. 850 [9th A  ugust, 1898.]
Short title 1. This Law may be cited as the Famagusta Improvement
Law.
Interpre- 2. In this Law-
tation. "  Municipality" means the Municipal Council or
Commission duly constituted by law to exercise muni-
cipal authority and government within the town of
Famagusta ;
"  town "means the town of Famagusta as hereinafter
defined ;
8"town of F amagusta " means the area enclosed '
within the counterscarps of the ancient fortifications of
the said town and the sea.
Plans, 3. The Municipality shall, whenever required so to do by
the Governor, prepare a plan of the town of Famagusta,
showing :-
(a) the position, extent and area of all existing streets,
bui1dings and other spaces therein ;
(b) the manýýer in which it is desirable that the town
shall be divided and laid out into streets, open

8 FAMAGUSTA IMPROVEMENT. [CAP.56. 3 i
;
spaces and tenements, so as to secure the proper
rebuilding, reconstnýction and sanitation of the
town .
,
(c) the tenements in the possession or occupation of
private persons which will be affected by the
division and laying out.
And for the aforesaid purposes the Governor may afford
the Municipa!ity such assistance as may appear to him to
8 be desirable.
4. Every such plan when completed shall be deposited Deposit of
in the office of the Municipa!ity and shall remain open for plans.
the inspection of any person desiring to see it  at any reason-
able hour without the payment of any fee.
Notices of the deposit of any such plan shall be posted
in conspicuous places within the town.
5. Any person who considers that he will be prejudiced Objections,
or injuriously affected by the proposed laying out or how made.
reconstnýction of the town shall make his objections
thereto in writing, and shall deposit a  copy of them at the
office of the Municipa!ity.
6. Af ter the lapse of two months from the date of its Submis~i~n
being deposited, the plan, with any objections thereto as ~f~ý~e;::.sýon
aforesaid, shall be forwarded by the Municipality to the
Governor, and the Governor in Council, af ter considering
it, may alter or amend it in any way which to him may
seem expedient.
A copy of the plan as fýnally settled by the Governor in
Council shall be certified by the clerk of the council and
shall be deposited in the office of the Municipality, and
shall remain open for inspection by any person desiring to
8see it at any reasonable hour without the payment of any
fee.
7. Af ter the plan is so deposited the Municipality shall Powers with
p~ocee.d to lay out t~e town of Famagusta in accordaý:ýce ~:~~~: ~~t
wýth ýto and for thýs purpose shall have the followýng town.
powers and duties-
(a) the Municipality may acquire the land shown on
the plan as required for streets or drains as if
the sanction of the Governor for the acquisition
of the land had been notified under section 130
of the Municipa! Corporations Law; Cap.. 2.0.

4 CAP.56.] FAMAGUSTA IMPROVEMENT. :o i
(b) the Municipality sha1l proceed to make the streets
and drains and to clear the open spaces shown
on the plan;
(c) the Municipality shall require the owners of the
land comprised within the town of Famagusta
to layout and divide it in accordance with the
plan;
(d) the Municipality shall apply to the Director
of Lands and Surveys to have the lands
8in the town divided as shown on the plan
and the Tapou Registration thereof made in -
accordance with the division ;
(e) the Municipality shall proceed to assess in the
manýýer hereinafter provided the value of the
several tenements and holdings in the town as
laid out and divided on the plan.
Assessment. 8. In assessing the value of tenements under the powers
contained in this Law the Municipality shall take into
account the enhancement of value consequent upon the
reconstruction and improvement of the town.
Borrowing 9. The Municipality, with the sanction of the Governor,
powers. may borrow such sums as may be necessary to enable them
to carry out the provisions of this ,Law.
~e~::::~; .10. The t?tal cost of laying out the.town in accordance
inc?rred in ,výth the saýd plan, and of constructýng the streets and
~~~~ out drains and of reserving the open spaces shown in the plan,
and allsums obtained by the Municipality to enable them to
carry out the provisions of this Law, shall be and remain
a  fýrst charge on all the lan ds comprised in the town until
theyare fully repaid with all interest which may accrue
thereon ;  a~d. the. am.ount of such cost shc;ýll be appo~ioned 8
by the Munýcýpality ýn the manýýer provýded by thýs Law
on the land as divided in the plan:
Provided always that this charge shall not operate on any
lands or buildings belonging to the Government and used for
public purposes, or on the space occupied by the ancient
fortifýcations, or on anY ancient building not put to profýt-
able use, or on any property now used as a mosque, church
or school or for the purpose of religious worship, or on any
land in respect of which the improvement charge has been
fully paid.

18 FAMAGUSTA IMPROYEMENT. [CAP. ~6. ~ i
11. The amounts expended by the Municipality shall be Charge on i
repaid by the owners of the property within the town owners. il
within a  period not exceeding twenty years, in proportion i
to the value of the property as assessed as aforesaid held ~
by the owners, by equal annual instalments, with interest
on the amount at any time remaining unpaid at the rate of
five per centum per annum. Such amount shall be termed
the "  improvement charge "  and shall remain a  first charge
on the property notwithstanding any devolution or sale
8 until fully paid with all interest due thereon.
12. Any person aggrieved by any assessment made by Appeal to
the Municipality may apply to the District Court; and the gisý:ýÝct
District Court is hereby empowered to hear the application ou .
and determine and fix the amount to be taken as the
assessed value.
13. Where the owner of any tenement makes default in ~roceedings
the payment of any instalment of any improvement charge ~~::ý~an~to~f
or of any interest due thereon, the Municipality may, improve-
without any notice to him, apply to the District Court for ment charge.
an order of sale of the property in question; and the
District Court, on the production of a certificate purporting
to be signed by the clerk of the Municipality certifying the
amount in default, may make an order for the sale of the
property unless the sum is forthwith paid, or such other
order as may seem just.
14. When the Municipality makes default or delay in Pow~r to
carrY.Ýng out the provisions of this Law the Governor may ;~;::;:~~ acý
appoýnt any officer of the Government or other fit and where
proper person to carry them out; and the person so Municipality
appointed shall., for the time for which he is appointed, :~~~1t.
have all powers conferred by this Law on the Municipality.
8 15. Where any person makes any default in carrying out Enforcing
the orders or instructions of the Municipality under this obedience to
LthM..lithD .fLdsdorders of
aw, e unýcýpa ty or e ýrector o an an Municipality.
Surveys, as the case nlay be, may apply to the District
Court of Famagusta for an order ca11ing upon the defaulter
to comply with all such orders and instructions; and the
District Court may thereupon make such order as may seem
just ;  and any such order shall be deemed to be equivalent
to an order made in a  civil action, and may be enforced in
like manýýer to any such order.