

i
8 CAP.61.
CYPRUS
8
:  , ":'",1
FOREST (PROTECTION ACAINST
INCENDIARISM)
CHAPTER 61 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY .
C, F, ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W,L,
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws tll;iflýin the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907,]
1959

@ i
CHAPTER 61.
FOREST (PROTECTION AGAINST INCENDIARISM).
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title 2
Ý-2 Interpretation 2
3 Detention orders 2
4 Place of detention 2
5 Person detained to be taken before President of District Court or
District Judge 3
6 President of District Court or District J udge to make report to Governor 3
7 Action upon receipt of report 3
8 Suspension of detention orders 3
9 Duration of detention order 4
10 Governor in Council may amend Schedule 4
11 Savingof other proceedings o'. 4
A LAW ENABLING CERTAIN MEASURES TO BE TAKEN IN CASES
OF FOREST FlRES.
1949Cap.97.
[25th]L 1946
]22 of51. uy, .
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Forest (Protection
against Incendiarism) Law.
I~terpreta- 2. In this Law-
týon.
"forest" means a Main State Forest and a Minor
Cap. 60. State Forest as defined in the Forest Law.
D~ention 3. If, upon the outbreak of a fire in any forest, it  is shown
or ers. to the satisfaction of the Governor that there is reasonable
cause to believe that any person, being an inhabitant of any
Schedule. of the villages mentioned in the Schedule to this Law as in
Ý-force for the time being, has been or is concerned or
implicated, whether directly or indirectly, in the outbreak
of such fire, the Governor may make an order against that
person (hereinafter in this Law referred to as a "  detention
order "), directing that he be detained and adetention
.order sha11 be sufficient authority for the arrest of the
person named therein, by any police officer.
Place ?f 4. Any person against whom adetention order has been
detentýon. made shall be detained in such place as may be authorized

Ý-
by the Governor and in accordance with the instructions
issued by him and, during such detention, such person shall
be deemed to be in lawful custody.
5. (1) Every person detained under the provisions of this Pers?n
Law shall, within eight days of his detention, be taken ~:t~~~ee~ to
before a  President of a  District Court or a  District judge befo~e
who shall proceed with all reasonable speed to inquire into ~Ý:~c~nt of
the reasons for his detention. Court or
-District
., (2) The procedure to be followed in any inquiry under this }udge.
section as to the taking of evidence on oath, examination and
cross-examination of witnesses, appearance of advocates and
the issue and service of summonses and the enforcement of
obedience thereto, shall be as ncarIf as possible the same
as the procedure for the time being followed in summary
trials.
(3) In proceedings under this section, it shall not be
necessary to prove that the person detained was guilty of
any particular act or acts tending to show that he was
concerned or implicated, whether directly or indirectly
in the outbreak of the fire with reference to which the
detention order was made but shall be suffýcient if, from all
the circumstances of the cage, the President of the District
Court or the District j udge considers that the person
detained should not be released unconditionally.
6. The President of a  District Court or a  District judge, Pý:esi?ent of
af ter considering the evidence adduced before him, shall ~~ý::c~r
make a  report to the Governor setting out his findings of District
fact and his opinion as to whether the person detained !n"a~~er~~ort
should be released unconditionally. to Governor.
7. Upon the receipt of areport under the provisions of Action upon
8 section 6 of this Law, if  the President of a District Court or a  receirýt of
District judge has expressed the opinion that the person repo.
detained should be released unconditionally, the Governor
shall order accordingly and the person detained shall be
released forthwith and the detention order shall be deemed
to have been cancelled ;  in every other cage, the Governor
may make such further order, regarding the detention of
such person, as the Governor may think fit.
8. (1) At any time af ter adetention order has been made Suspensi~n
dh"
lthd..fhGof detentýon
an w 1 s suc or er remaýns ýn orceý t e overoor may orderþ.

4 CAP.61.] Forest (Protection Against Incendiarism). :o
direct that the operation of the order be suspended, subject
to such conditions-
(a) imposing upon the person affected such restrictions
as may be specified in the direction in respect
of his place of residence;
(b) requiring the person affected to notify his move-
ments in such manner, at such times and to such
authority or persQn as niay be specified ~n the
direction,
as the Governor may think fit and the Governor may, at 8
any time, revoke any such direction.
(2) if any person fails to comply with a condition attached
to adirection given by the Governor under subsection (1)
of this section, that person shall, whether or not the direction
is revoked be guilty of an offence against this Lawand shall
be liable to imprisonment not exceeding three years or to a
fine not exceeding one hundred pounds or to both such
imprisonment and fine.
Durati?n of 9. Every detention otder, unless previously cancelled,
~:~:~.týon sha1l remain in force for three months and no longer,
unless renewed by the Governor for a further period of three
months in which case it sha1l remain in force for such
further period.
Gover~or in 10. The Governor in Council may, at any time by Order
~~~~i1 may published in the Gazette, delete from or add to the Schedule
Schedule. to this Law the name of any YÝllage.
Saving of 11. Nothing in this Law contained sha1l prevent any
~;~~edings. proceedings bemg taken against a  person detained for any
offence in connection with the outbreak of fire with reference
to which the detention order was made.
8

8 i
SCHEDULE.
(Section 3.)
VILLAGES AF:FECTED.
Nicosia District.
Agroladhou. Kalopanayiotis. Nikos.
Alevga. Kalyvakia. Pakhyammos.
Alithinou. Kambos. Pedhoulas.
Amadhies. Kannavia. Phterykoudhi.
Ambelikou. Kapcdhes. Piyenia.
8Apýiki (Lefka). Khaleri. Platanistasa.
Ayia Irini. Kokkina. Polystipos.
Ayia Marina Xyliatou. Korakou. Pyrgos, Pano.
Ayion Yeorgoudhi. Kourdhali. Sarandi.
Ayios Epiphanios Klirou. Lagoudhera. Selain t' Api.
Ayios Epiphanios Soleas. Lazania. Selemani.
Ayios Theodhoros Soleas. Lefka. Sina Oros.
A yios Theodhoros Tillirias. Livadhia. Spilia.
Ayios Yeoryios Kafkalou. Loutros. Tembria.
Chakistra. Lythrodhonda. Varisha.
Evrykhou. Mandres. Vroisha.
Galata. Milikouri. Xerovounos.
Galini. Mitsero. Xyliatos.
Kakopetria. Moutou11as. Yerakies.
Kaliana. Nikitari.
Limassol District.
Amiandos, Kato. Lemithou. Platres, Pano. .
Amiandos, Pano. Moniatis. Prodhromos.
Ayios. Dhimitrios. Paelomylos. Trimiklini.
Kaminaria. Pelendrla. Tris Elies.
Khandria. Phiýýi.
Kyperounda. Platres, Kato.
Famagusta District.
Akanthou. Dhavlos. Phlamoudhi.
Ardhana. Ephtakomi. Platani.
Ayios Andronikoc; (Topju Komokipos. Trypimeni.
Keuy). Malounda. Yerani.
Ayios Khariton. Mandres.
8Ayios Nikolaos. Ovgoros.
Paphos District. 50 Vol. II
d.K.
MId475.
Ana hýou. annaVlOU. e an ra.
Arkaka. Kinousa. Panayia, Pano.
Arkhimandrita, Kato. Konklia. Phasoula.
Arkhimandrita, Pano. Kritou Marottou. Pomos and Paliambela.
Arminou. Livadhi. Sarama.
Asproyia. Lyso. Souskiou.
Ayia Marina. Magounda. Vrecha.
Ayios Ioannis. Magounda Eso. Yialia, Pano.
Ayios, Merkourios. Malounda. Zakharia.
Ayios Nikolaos. Mamoundali.
Istinjo. Marona.

'3
Kyrenia District.
Aghirda. Kalogrea. Lamaka tis Lapithou.
Agridhaki. Karmi. Paleosophos.
Ayia Irini. Keumurju. Phterykha.
Ayios Amvrosios. Kharcha. Pileri.
Bellapais. Klepini (Arab Keuy). Sisklipos.
Dhikomo, Kato. Kormakiti. Sykhari.
Dhikomo, Pano. Koutsovendis. Vasilia.
Dhiorios. Krini. Vouno.
Larnaca District.
Delikipo. Vavatsinia. 8
8