

-i
C CAP. 62..
CYPRUS
8
FRAUDULENT TRANSFERS A VOIDANCE
CHAPTER 62. OF THE LAWS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTEO BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Govel'nment of Cyprus the Govel'nment Pl'intel's of this Editian
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959

8
CHAPTER 62.
FRAUDULENT TRANSFERS A VOIDANCE.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title 2
2 Interpretation 2
83  Avoidance of fraudulent transfers 2
4 Procedure to set aside transfer 3
5 Registration to be rectified 3-
To PROVIDE FOR THE SETTING As IDE OF TRANSFERS OF
PROPERTY MADE TO HINDER CREDITORS.
1949 Cap. 95. ..(24th A pril, 1886.]
Short title 1. This Law may be cited as the Fraudulent Transfers
A voidance Law.
I.ýýterpreta- 2 In this
Law-
týon. .
"  creditors of a  debtor "  means not only the persons
to whom he is actually indebted, but also every
sheriff, and every person acting for a sheriff, who shall
lawfully put into exec~tion any judgment given
against the debtor, and also every person (if any) in
whom the property of the debtor or the right to sell
and dispose of it shall either by his own act or by
operation of law become vested for the comnIon benefýt
of all the persons to whom he is  indebted ;
"judgment debt" means not only a debt for the
payment of which a judgment has been given by a
competent Court, but also every debt in respect of
8which the person to whom it  is due has duly established
his right to rafik as a  creditor of the person from whom
it  is  due on the distribution of the property of the last-
mentioned person under any law providing for the
distribution of the property of bankrupts or insolvent
persons among their creditors.
~v~Ý:::~~nt 3. (1) Every gift, sale, pledge, mortgage or other transfer
transfers. or disposal of any movable or immovable property made
by any person with intent to hincler or delay his creditors

_C~
FRAUDULENT TRANSFERS AYDIDANCE. [CAP.62. 3
or any of them in recovering from him, his or their debts
shall be deemed to be fraudulent, and shall be invalid as
against such creditor or creditors ;  and, notwithstanding
any such gift, sale, pledge, mortgage or other transfer or
disposal, the property purported to be transferred or
otherwise dealt with may be seized and sold in satisfaction
of any judgment debt due from the person making such
gift, sale, pledge, mortgage or other transfer or disposal.
(2) In any appIication under the provisions of this Law to 2 of 10/27.
set aside a  transfer or assignment of any property made to
; any parent, spouse, child, brother or sister of the transferor
or assignor otherwise than in exchange for money or for
other property of equivalent value or for good consideration
the onus of proving that such transfer or assignment was
bona fide and not made with intent to hinder or delay his
creditors shall rest upon the transferor or assignor and upon
the person to whom such transfer or assignment has been
made.
(3) No sale, mortgage, transfer or assignment made in
exchange for money or other property of equivalent value
shall be voidable under the provisions of this Law, unless
the purchaser, mortgagee, transferee, or assignee shall be
shown to have accepted it with knowledge that such sale,
mortgage, transfer, or assignment, was made by the vendor,
mortgagor, transferor, or assignor with intent to delay or
defraud his creditors.
4. Any gift, sale, pledge, mortgage or other transfer or Procedu~e
disposal of any movable or immovable property deemed ~~a:~e~~ýde
to be fraudulent under the provisions of section 3  of this 3 of 10/27.
Law whether made before or af ter the commencement 4  of 10/27.
of an action or other proceeding wherein the right to recover
the debt has been estabIished may be set aside by an order
of the Court, to be obtained on the appIication of any
8judgment creditor made in such action or other proceeding,
and to the Court before which such action or other proceed-
ing has been heard or is pending.
5. It shall be lawful for the proper officer of District Registration
Lands Office, on deIivery to him of an office copy of any order ~~~~ed.
made under the provisions of the last preceding section to
make or cause to be made all such registrations in the books
of the District Lands Office as may be necessary consequent
on the order.