

8 CAP. 63.
,
CYPIUS
8
FRUIT TREES PROTECTlON
CHAPTER 63 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV, LONDON, W.1.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1.907.)
1959

:C", CAFe 63.]FRUIT TREES PROTECTION. 8
CHAPTER 63.
FRUIT TREES PROTECTION.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title 2
82 Interpretation 2
3 Carob, dliye and fruit tree wood not to be sold nOT exposed for Bale
without permit , 2
4 Wood when deemed to be exposed for bale 2
5 Restriction on issue of permit 3
6 Duration of permit 3
7 Person selIing must have permit with him at sale 3
8 Wood sold without permit may be seized summarily 3
9 Court may order costs of vexatious complaint to be paid by complainant 3
ýo Or by person on whose information complaint was made ...3
II Disposal of wood seized 3
l2 Part of fine may be paidto informer ' ...4
FOR THE BETTER PROTECTION OF FRUIT TREES.
1949Cap.96. [31stjuly,1891.]
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Fruit Trees Protection
Law.
I~terpreta- 2. In this Law-
týon.
II  fruit tree "  means every fruit producing tree that
is cultivated for domestic purposes, and every tree
which is customarily grafted.
Carob, dliye 3. N o  carob wood, olive wood, or wood of any fruit trees
~~:ýd shall be sold or exposed for sale except under a permit in
not to be writing signed by a  District Commissioner specially author-
~~~o~J for izing the sale ;  and aý:ýy person who s~all sell or e.xpose for
8bale ~ýthout sale any such wood wýthout such permýt shall be liable to a
permýt.
fýtdifýdt.. ne no excee ng ve polin s, or o ýmpnsonment not
exceeding three months, or to both such renaýties, and all
carob and olive wood, or wood of any fruit tree sold or
offered for sale by any person without such permit shall be
confýscated.
Wood when 4. Wood shall be deemed to be exposed for sale within
deemed to be
th.f   thdi.h..b. exposed for e meanýng o e prece ng sectýon w en ýt ýs eýng
bale. transported to any place for sale.

e FRUITTREES PROTECTION. [CAP.63. 3
5.. No District Commissioner shall issue any such permit, ReS.trictio~
except to a  person dwelling within his district. ~~~~~.e o
6. No permit issued under this Law shall be valid for a Duration of
longer period than three months from its date. permit.
7. It shall be the duty of every person selling or exposing Pe
ýr
ý~on
tfIlibddff.se ýng mus
or sa e o ve or caro woo, or woo o any ruýt tree to have permit
have the permit of sale in his possession at the time when wiýth him at
8 the wood is sold or exposed for sale. sa e.
8. Any police officer, or any official of the Forest ~~~~u~old
Department, or any mukhtar or rural constable within perm~t may
his ~age or beat, m~y call on any person selling or ~:ý:ý~:~ýy.
exposýng for sale any aliye or carob wood, or wood of any
fruit tree to produce the permit of the Commissioner for the
sale thereof ;  and if such person shall fail thereupan to
produce the permit, the wood may be seized by the person
demanding production of the permit and delivered up to
the custody of the Commissioner of the District or to the
mukhtar of any yillage in order that it may be disposed of
as hereinafter provided.
9. if on the hearing of any complaint under this Law, COodurt ma
tY
hChII.dh.d.hdr  er cas s
t  e ourt s  a consý er t   at ýt was ma e wýt out ue cause, of vexations
it may order the complainant to pay to the person com- compl.aintto
I.
d.
all.d  bh.bfhbe paýd by
p aýne agamst costs mcurre y ým y  reason O t  e  complainant.
proceedings and such reasonable indemnity for lass of time
as to the Court may seem fit.
10. Where a ~omplain~ is ~ade by an.y offi~er. ü.f the ~~ ~Ese:son
Govemment on Informatýon gýven by a  pnvate Indivýduaý, information
the Court may make such order for costs and indemnity complai:t
against the person on whose information the charge was was ma e.
8 made.
11. All wood seized under the provisions of this Law shall DiSP
dOSal.ofd.woo seýze.
be said and the net proceeds of sale, af ter deductmg the
expenses thereof, shall be paid into the Department of the
Accountant-General :
Provided always that if, within forty days af ter the
seizure, any person other than the person in whose possession
the wood was found shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Court, on the hearing of any complaint under this Law, or
to the satisfaction of the District Commissioner, that the
c. qý

4 CAP.63.] FRUIT TREES PROTECTION. O 1
wood is his property, the wood shall be given up to him, or, -
if  it  has been sold, the proceeds.of sale, af ter deducting the
expenses thereof, shall be paid to him.
Part of fi~e 12. The Court may direct that any portion not exceeding
:afn~o~~~~ one-half of the moneys recovered in payment of any fýne
imposed under this Law shall be paid to all or any of the
persons on whose information or evidence the fýne has
been imposed, in such shares as the Court shall direct.
8
i
~;
~
8