

-i
C CAP. 74. 1
CYPRUS
8
LOTTERIES
CHAPTER 74 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY. LONDON. W.l.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the EvidencB (Colonial Statutes) Act. 1.907.]
1959

2 ". GAP. 74.J LO1TERIES... O i
CHAPTER 74.
LOTTERIES.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title 2 8
PART I.
PRELIMINARY
2 Interpretation 2
PART II.
GOVERNMENT LOTTERIES.
3 Power to promote and conduct Govemment lotteries 3
4 Proceeds of Govemment lotteries 3
5 Regulations 3
PART III.
UNLA WFUL LOTTERIES AND RESTRICTIONS ON PRIZE COMPETITIONS.
6 Exemption of smaIl lotteries incidenýaý to certain entertainments ...5
7 Exemption of private lotteries 6
8 Resmction on certain prize competitions 7
9 Exemption of Govemment lotteries 8
ýo IllegaIity of lotteries 8
II OfIences in connection with lotteries 8
L2 OfIences by bodies corporate , ...9
L3 Forfeiture 9
14 Power fu issue ~arcýi warrant::- ýo
PART IV'.
~ISC~LLANEOUS.
L5. Saving ýo
A LAW TO AUTHORIZE THE PROMOTION AND CONDUCT OF
GOVERNMENT LOTTERIES; TO PROHIBIT UNAUTHORIZED
LOTTERIES AND RESTRICT CERTAIN PRIZE COMPETITIONS;
AND FOR PURPOSES CONNECTED WITH THE MATTERS
AFORESAID.
L4 of 56. [16th May, 1956.J 8
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Lotteries Law.
PART I.
PRELIMINARY.
Interpre- 2. (1) In this Law, unless the context otherwise requires-
tion. tt  the Director "   me~ns the person holding the office
of Director of Lotteries and includes any person
appointed to act in that office;

8 -ýOTTERIES. [CAP. 74. 3 i
"Government lottery" means a  lottery promoted .
and conducted by the Director under the provisions II
of Part II ;
"  lottery" means any scheme for distributing prizes
by lot or chance ;
"money" includes a cheque, banknote, currency
note, postal order or money order;
"  newspaper" includes any journal, magazine or
other periodical publication ;
8 "  ticket" includes, in relation to any lottery or
proposed lottery, any document evidencing the claim
of a  person to participate in the chances of the lottery.
(2) For the purposes of this Law-
(a) references to printing shall be construed as
including references to writing and other
modes of representing or reproducing words
in a  visible form;
(b) documents or other matters shall be deemed to
be distributed if theyare distributed to
persons or places whether within or outside
the Colony, andthe expression" distribution "
shall be construed accordingly.
PART II.
GOVERNMENT LOTTERIES.
3. (1) Subject to the provisions 01 this Lawand of any Power to
R~gu1ations ma~e thereu~der, it shall be lawtu! for the ~~~~ý:duct
Dýrector from týme to týme to promote and conduct a Govemment
Government lottery, and in relation thereto to do all such lotteries.
acts and things and give all such directions as he may deem
necessary or expedient for that purpose or as may be
8prescribed and, without limiting the generality of the fore-
going power, in particu!ar-
(a) to fýx the number and price of tickets to be issued
for any such lottery ;
(b) to appoint and remunerate agents for the sale of
such tickets ;
(c) to fýx the number and value of the prizes to be
apportioned ;
(d) to determine the time when, the place where, and
the manýýer in which, drawings shall take place
for the allotment ot prizes.

-
4 GAP. 74.] LOTTERIES. -if 1
(2) Any such acts, things or directions which may have
been done or given, as the cage may be, at any time before
the commencement of this Law, shall nevertheless be
deemed to have been done or given by virtue of the powers
conferred by this section.
~oceeds 0\ 4. The proceeds of the sale of tickets in every Govern-
lo;;;e~~ý:en ment lottery shall, subject to deduction of the monies
apportioned for prizes and such other deductions as the
Governor may approve, be paid into the Development 8
Funds of the Colony,
Regulations. 5. (1) The Governor may make Regulations prescribing
all matters which are necessary or convenient to be pre-
scribed for giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this
Part,'and in particwar-
(a) for appointing a committee to advise and assist the
Director in the promotion and conduct of
Government lotteries ;
(b) for prescribing the conditions to be observed by
agents appointed for the sale of tickets for such
lotteries and the rights, obligations and liabili-
ties of such agents ;
(c) for prescribing the form or contents of such tickets ;
(d) for prescribing the information to be published
conceming any Government lottery and the
manýýer in which it shall be published ;
(e) for prescribing the time within which and the
manýýer in which prizes shall be claimed ;
(f) for providing for the disposal of unclaimed prizes
or money or of prizes or money as to which any
dif:pute has arisen;
(g) for prescribing the persons who shall be present at 8
any drawing for the allotment of prizes and
their powers and duties in relation thereto and
to any dispute or difficulty which may arise in
the conduct of the drawing,
(2) Regulations made under this section may prescribe
that iri certain event s to be specifýed and af ter such time as
shall be specifýed the proceeds of unclaimed prizes shall be
forfeited to Her Majesty and paid into the Development
Funds of the Colony,

C LonERIES. lGAP. 74.5 i
.PART III. ,
UNLAWFUL LOTTERIES AND RESTRICTIONS ON PRlZE
COMPETITIONS.
6. (1) A lottery promoted as an incident of an entertain- Exemption
ment to which this section applies shall be deemed not to f~;e~:~
be an unlawful lottery, but the conditions specjfýed in incident.aý
subsection (2) shall be observed in connection with the :~t~~=
8promotion and conduct of the lottery, and if any of those ments.
conditions is broken, every person concemed in the pro-
motion or conduct of the lottery shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable to imprisonment not exceeding
six months or to a  fýne not exceeding two hundred pounds
or to both such imprisonment and fýne, unless he proves that
the offence was committeed without his knowledge.
(2) The conditions referred to in subsection (1) are that-
(a) the whole proceeds of the entertainment (including
the proceeds of the lottery) af ter deducting-
Ci) the expenses of the entertainment, ex-
cluding expenses incurred in connection with the
lottery; and
(ii) the expenses incurred in printing tickets
in the lottery; and
(iii) such sum (if any) not exceeding thirty
pounds as the promoters of the lottery think fit
to appropriate on account of any expenses
incurred by them in purchasing prizes in the
lottery,
shall be devoted to purposes other than private
gain;
Cb) none of the prizes in the lottery shall be money
prizes ;
8(c) tickets or chances in the lottery shall not be saId or
issued, nar shall the result of the lottery be
declared, except on the premises on which the
entertainment takes place and during the pro-
gress of the entertainment; and
(d) the tacilities afforded for participating in lotteries
shall not be the only, or the only substantial,
inducement to persons to attend the entertain-
ment.
(3) The entertainments to which this section applies are
bazaars, sales of work, fetes and other entertainments ot a

6 GAP. 74."] LOTTERIES. --18 i
,
similar character, whether limited to one day or extending .
over two or more days. II
Exen:ýption 7. (1
)  In this section-
of pnvate
lotteries. "private lottery" means a  lottery in the Colony
w4ich is promoted for, and in which the sale of tickets
or chances by the promoters is confýned to, either-
(a) members of one society established and conducted
for purposes not connected with gaming,
wagering or lotteries; or 8
(b) persons all of whom work on the same premises ;
or
(c) persons all of whom reside on the same premises,
and which is  promoted by persons each of whom is  a
person to whom underthe foregoing provisions tickets or
chances may be sold by the promoters and, in the case
ot a lottery promoted for the members of a society, is a
person authorized in writing by the goveming body of
the society to promote the lottery ;
,t promoter" means the individual who, or, in the
case of a  lottery promoted by a society, the secretary
(orsimilar official) of the society whiCh promotes the
lottery, and in the case of a lottery promoted, held,
drawn or managed without the Coloý:ýy, the person
primarily responsible for conducting the affairs of suclý
lottery in the Colony ;
,t society 'i  includes club, institution, organization or
other association of persons by whatever name called,
and each local or affiliated branch orsection of a society
shall be regarded as a separate and distinct society.
(2) A private lottery shall be deemed not to be an
un la wful lottery, but the following conditions shall be
observed in connection with the promotion and conduct of
the lottery, that is to say-. 8
(a) the whole proceeds, af ter deductýng only expenses
incurred for printing and stationery, shall be
devoted to the provision ot prizes for purchasers
of tickets or chances, or in the case ot a lottery
promoted for the members of a society, shall be
devoted either to the provision of prizes as
aforesaid or to purposes which are purposes of
the society or, as to part, to the provision of
prizes as aforesaid and, as to the remainder, to
such purposes as aforesaid ;

18 LO1TERIES. [GAP. 74. 7 i
(b) there shall ~ot bee~bited, publish:d or distributed i
any wntten notýce or advertýsement of the 'i
lotteryother than :-
(i) a  notice thereof exhibited on the premises
of the society for whose members it  is promoted,
or, as the case may be, on the premises on which
the persons for whom it is promoted work or
reside; and
(ii) such announcement or advertisement
8thereof as is contained in the tickets, if any ;
(c) the price of every ticket or chance shall be the
same, and the price of any ticket shall be stated
on the ticket;
(d) every ticket shall bear upon the face of it  the names
and address of each of the promoters and a
statement of the persons to whom the sale of
tickets or chances by the promoters is restricted,
and a  statement that no prize won in the lottery
shall be paid or delivered by the promoters to
any person other than the person to whom the
winning ticket or chance was sold by them, and
no prize shall be paid or delivered except in
accordance with that statement ;
(e) no ticket or chance-shaIl be issued or allotted by the
--promoters except by wa y of saIe and upon
receipt of the fUll price thereof and no
money or vaIuable thing so received by a
promoter shall in any circumstances be returned;
(f) no tickets in the lottery shall be sent through the
post.
(3) if any of the conditions specified in subsection (2) is
broken, each of the proIIloters of the lottery, and where the
person by whom the condition is bröken is not one of the
promoters, that person also, shall be guilty of an offence
8and shall be liable to imprisonment not exceeding six.
months or to a fine not exceeding two hundred pounds or to
both such imprisonment and fýne :
Provided that it  shall be a  defence for a  person charged
only by reason of his being a promoter of the lottery to
prove that the offence was committed without his know-
ledge.
Restriction
8. (1) It shall be unlawfuý to conduct in or through any on.certain
newspaper, or in connection with the saIe of any article to ~~:i~~::-

.
~-~- L~1TERIES. 9 i
the :public, or in connection with any trade or business i
relatýng to any such sale- ýI
(a) any competition in which prizes are offered for !
forecasts of the result either of a  future event,
or of a  past event the result of which is not yet
ascertained or not yet generally known ;
(b) any other competition success in which does not
depend upon the exercise of skill.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to
8imprisonment not exceeding six months or to a  fine not
exceeding two hundred pounds or to both such imprison-
ment and fine, without prejudice, however, to his liability,
if  any, to be proceeded against under the provisions of this
Part of this Law relating to lotteries.
~fxemption 9. Nothing in this Part shall apply to or in relation to a
Goverement Govemment lottery.
lotteries.
l11eg~ity of 10. Subject to the provisions of this Part, all lotteries are
lottenes.
nIfulu aw .
Offence
ti~ in 11. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, every
connec on
h.
t""
hI  tdwith person w o ýn connec ýon wýt any o  tery promote or
lotteries. proposed to be promoted either in the Colony or elsewhere-
(a) prints any tickets for use in the lottery; or
(b) sells or distributes, or offers or advertises for sale or
distribution, or has in his possession for the
purpose of sale or distribution, any tickets or
chances in the lottery; or
(c) prints, publishes or distributes, or has in his
possession for the purpose ot publication or
distribution-
(i) any advertisement of the lottery; or
(ü) any list (whether complete or not) of prize 8
winners or winning tickets in the lottery; or
(iii) any such matter descriptive of the draw-
ing or intended drawing of the lottery, or other-
wise relating to the lottery, as is calculated to
act as an inducement to persons to participate
in that lottery or in other lotteries; or
(d) brings, or invites any person to send, into the
Colony for the purpose of sale or distribution any
ticket in, or advertisement of, the lottery; or

e .LOTIERlES. [GAP. 74. 9 i
(e) sends or attempts to send out of the Colony any i
money or va1uable thing received in respect of ii
the sale or distribution, or any document
recording the sa1e or distribution, or the identity
of the holder, of any ticket or chance in the
lottery; or
(f) uses any premises, or caýýses or knowingly permits
any premises to be used, for purposes connected
with the promotion or conduct of the lottery; or
8(g) caýýses, procures or attempts to procure any person
to do any of the aforementioned acts,
sha11 be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to imprison-
ment not exceeding six months or to a  fine not exceeding
two hundred pounds or to both such imprisonment and fiile.
(2) In any proceedings instituted under subsection (1) it
sha11 be a  defence to prove that the lottery to which the
proceedings relate was such a  lottery as is declared by any
section of this Part not to be an unlawfullottery, and that
at the date of the alleged offence the defendant believed, and
had reasonable ground for believing, that none of the
conditions required by that section to be observed in
connection with the promotion and conduct of the lottery
had been broken.
(3) Proceedings under paragraph (c) of subsection (1) in
respect of any matter published in a  newspaper sha11 not be
instituted except by or with the consent of the Attomey-
General.
12. Where a person convicted of an offence under this Offence
Law is a  body corporate, every person who at the date of by bodites
th..fhffdiffif   hcorpora e.
e commýssýon o t   e o ence was a rector or o cer o t  e
body corporate shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence unless he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge.
8 13. The Court before which a  person is proved to have Forfeiture.
committed an offence under this Law in relation to an
unlawful lottery or proposed lottery shall order to be
forfeited any coins, banknotes and currency notes produced
to the Court which are shown to the satisfaction of the Court
to represent the price of tickets or chances, or prize money
or prizes in such lottery, and sha11 order to be destroyed all
documents (other than banknotes and currency notes)
produced to the Court which are shown to the satisfaction of
the Court to relate to the promotion of such lottery.

ýo CAP. 74.] LOTTERIES. i
~ower tolý14. Any judicial officer of a  District Court, if  satisfýed by O
ýssue searc .f.
hhh.
bldIwarrant. ýn ormatýon on oat t   at t   ere ýs reasona e groun to i
suspect that any premises are being used for the purpose of
the commission of an offence under this Part in connection
with a  lottery or proposed lottery, may grant a warrant
under his hand authorizÝng any police officer at any time or
times within one month from the date thereof to enter, if
necessary by force, the said premises and every part
thereof, and to search for and seize and remove any docu-
ments, money or valuable thing found therein which he has
reasonable ground to suppose are on those premises for 8
any purpose which constitutes an infringement of any
provision of this Part relating to lotteries.
PART LV.
MýSCELLANEOUS.
Saving. 15. Nothing in this Law contained shall apply-
(a) to any lottery' organized and carried out under any
other Law in force for the time being ;
(b) to any lottery organized and carried out with the
prior permission of the Financial Secretary and
in accordance with such directions or conclitiofis
as he may deem fýt to give or impose, for the
purpose of raising funds for the bui1ding or
repair of any church, mosque or public hospital,
or for the purpose of raising funds for any
other charitable purpose approved by the
Financial Secretary ;
(c) to any sweepstake or pari-mutuel organized at and
on the day of any race meeting and controlled
"by any horse racing club or association approved
by the Governor, subject to such conclitiofis as
he may deem fýt to impose. 8