

8 CAP. 75, i
CYPRUS
8
OLD MET ALS
CHAPTER 75 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the EvidenGe (Colonial Statutes) AGt, 1907.]
1959
c. xl

-2 " CA~. 7~] OLD METALS. .O
CHAPTER 75.
OLD METALS.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title 2
Ý-2 Interpretation 2
3 Dealers in old metals to be licensed 2
4 Licensing of dealers in old metals 3
5 Licence to be personal to holder and to be exhibited 3
6 Books to be kept 3
7 Restrictions on purchases of old metals... 3
8 Restriction on quantity in which certain metals may be purchased ...3
9 Old metals not to be changed or disposed of for a  period of 48 hours 3
ýo Powers of police officers 4
II Penalties and liability of dealer in old metals for acts of his servants
or agents 4
FIRST SCHEDULE.
FORM A-Application 5
FORM B-Licence 5  .
SECOND SCHEDULE.
FORM A-Book for old metals purchased or otherwise acquired ...5
FORM B-Book for sales or other disposals of old metals ...6
A LAW TO REGULATE THE BUSINESS OF DEALERS IN OLD
METALS.
II of 52. [5tk May, 1952.]
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Old Metals (Dealers)
Law.
Interpreta- 2. In this Law-
tion. cc dealer in old metals "  means any person dealing in,
buying and selling old metal, used metal, scrap metal,
broken metal, partly manufactured metal goods or Ý-
defaced or old metal goods, whether such person deals
in such articles only or together with any other business;
and the term ~c old metals "  means the said articles.
Dealers in 3. From and af ter the lst day of june, 1952, no person
old ý:netals to shal1 carry on business as a dealer in old metals, unless he
be lýcensed.
fýrb.litdfthaffý.
hst o taýns a cence so o o rom e cer ýn c arge
of Police in the district in which he proposes to carry on
such business (hereinafter called cc Offýcer in charge "), in
accordance with the provisions of this Law.

e -OLD METALS. .[GAP. 75. 3 i
4. Any person desiring to carry on business as a  dealer ~~ns~ of
in old metals shall apply to the Officer in charge for a licence old =~s.
in the form "  A "  in the First Schedule to this Lawand the First
Officer in charge shall, upon payment of a  fee of three Schedule. ,
pounds, issue to such person a licence. in the form "  B "  in
such Schedule.
5. Every licence granted under the provisions o~ ~his ~c;~:o:l
Law shall be personal to the bolcler and shall be exhibýted toholder
8in a conspicuous place in the principal premises in the an~.~?t:
district in which the licensee carries on business as a  dealer ex ý ý .
in old metals.
6. Every person carrying on business as a  dealer in old ~ootks to be
metals shall keep a  book in the form "A" in the Second S:~O~d
Schedule to this Law wherein he shall forthwith enter the Schedulci.
particulars therein set out in respect of all old metals
purchased or otherwise received by him and a  book in the
form "  B "  in the Second Schedule to this Law, wherein he
shall forthwith enter the particulars therein set out in respect
of all old metals sold or otherwise disposed of by him; and
such books shall be open to inspection, at all times, by
any police officer.
7. No dealer in old metals shall purchase or otherwise Restrictihases.ons
.
Ionpurc
receýve any o d  metals- of old metals.
(a) except between the hours of sunrise and sunset;
(b) from any person under the age of sixteen years.
8. (1) Save under a permit in writing of the Officer Restricti?n
in charge no dealer in old metals shall purchase or other- f:  ~fua:~ýty
wise receive any metal to which this section applies, whether certain
new or old, in any quantity at one time of less weight than ::ý;ý~e
thirty okes. purchased.
8 (2) The metals to which this section applies are lead,
copper, brass, týn and pewter or any composite, the principal
ingredient of which is lead, copper, brass, tÝn or pewter,
as the case may be.
9. Every dealer in old metals shall keep all old metals oý~ mýtaýs
purchased or otherwise received by him, without changing ~~a:ý~edeor
the form in which such articles were so purchased or received, 1isposed.~
or disposing of the same in any way, for a  period of forty- o~r4~h~~rs.
eight hours af ter such article has been purchased or other-
wise received.
xl (2)

4 CAP.75.] OLD METALS. 8
Poýv:'ers of 10. Every police officer may, without warraýýt, enter aýýd
~~~~~s. search the premises where a  dealer in old metals carries on
business in order to prevent or detect the violation of any
of the provisions of this Law.
Penalties 11. (1) Any person who-
and
liabilit'! of (a) shal1 carry on business as a dealer in old metals
dealer ýn old. without a licence obtained under the
Provisions
metals for
acts of his of this Law or shall carry on such business in aýýy
~e;e:~:~s or p;remises other than the premises specified in his
8licence ;
(b) fails to keep any book and make such entries, as
required by this Law or knowingly makes any
entry which is false in aýýy material particular ;
(c) gives false particulars as to his name, sumame,
'business or address to a dealer in old metals
when selling or disposing of aýý}' old metals to
such dealer or when purchasing or receiving any
such metals from such dealer;
(d) contravenes or fails to observe any of the provisions
of section 7, 8  or 9  ;
(e) obstructs, assaults or resists a  police officer in the
execution of aýýy of his duties or the exercise of
aýýy of his powers under this Law,
is guilty of an offence and is liable to imprisonment not
exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding fifty pounds
or to both such imprisonment and fine aýýd the Court trying
the case may order that any old metal in respect of which the
offence has been committed shal1 be forfeited.
(2) Where aýý offence has been committed against this
Law by any servaýýt or agent of any dealer in old metals,
such dealer shall be deemed to be a party to the offence, and
may be charged aýýd, tried with actual1y committing the
offence and may be punished accordingly, unless he
establishes to the satisfaction of the Court that the offence 8
was committed without his knowledge and was not due to
any act or omission on his part.

8 OLD METALS. [CAP.75. 5
FIRST SCHEDULE.
(Section 4.)
FORM tt A."
ApPLICATION.
To the Officer in charge of Police in the district of .
i ,of hereby apply under the provisions of the Old
Metals (Dealers) Law, for licence to carry on business as a  dealer in old
metals at the following premises, that is to say:-
8 2. i havelIhave not* previously been a dealer in old metals.
Dated .
Applicant.
*Strike out words not required.
FORM tt B."
LICENCE.
Old Metals (Dealers) Law.
Licence is hereby granted to , of to carry on business
as a  dealer in old metals in accordance with the provisions of the Old
Metals (Dealers) Law, at the following premises, that is to say:-
Fee paid !30.
Dated
Officer in charge of Police in the
district of .
SECOND SCHEDULE.
(Section 6.)
FORM tt A."
8 BoOK FOROLD METALS PU~CHASED OR O~HERWISE AC~UIRED
Name and Name and Business
Date of Hour Description sumame of surname of and address
purchase of and weight person who person from of person
or receipt. day. of old actually whom pur- from whom
metal. purchased or chased or purchased.
received. received.

6CAP.75.] OLD METALS. " O
FORM tt B."
BoOK FOR SALES OR OTHER DýsPOSALS OF OLD METALS.
Description and Name and Bumame Business and address
Date of sale. weight of old metalaf person to whom of person to whom
saId or disposed of. saId or disposed of. saId or disposed of.
"
o
8
8