

8 CAP. 84. i
CYPRUS
8
RECOVERY OF COMPENSA TION FOR
INJURY TO PROPERTY
CHAPTER 84 OF THE LAWS
1959 EDITION
<.
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Gove,.nment of Cyp,.us the Government P,.inte,.s of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colanial StatutBs) Act, 1907.] .
1959

2 CAP. 84.] Recovery of C ompensation for i njury to Property. 8 i
CHAPTER 84.
INjURY TO PROPERTY.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
PART l.
PRELIMINARY.
8See/ion Page
1 Short title 2
2 Interpretation 3
PART II.
RECOVERY OF COMPENSATION AND PROCEDURE.
3 Persons liable to pay compensation 4
4 Notiçe of injury to be given to mukhtar and police 4
5 Mukhtar and complainant to Ýnspect daýnage 5
6 Mukhtar and Comýnission to estimate damage 5
7 Duties of Mukhtar 6
8 Objections list and liýnitations thereof 7
9 Powers and duties of Commissioner 8
10 Commissioner to take evidence 9
11 Recovery of compensation 10
12 Disposal of compensation, costs and fees recovered 11
PART III.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
13 Liýnitation of amount of compensation recoverable 11
14 Adjustment of amounts allocated when not represented by coin
current in Cypros '" 11
15 Remedy when persons causÝng damage or destruction are discovered... 12
16 When both Christian and Moslem mukhtar in a village or quarter ...12
17 Defaulting mukhtars and members of ViIIage Comýnissions ...12
18 Comýnissioner may take directions of Attorney-General ...12
19 Power to Governor to appoint persons to exercise powers, etc., of
Commissioner 13
20 Offences and penalties 13
21 Power to Governor Ýn Council to make Regulations 13
22 Non-application of this Law to towns, but power to Governor in
Council to apply it  to towns or quarters 14
8
To MAKE PROVISION FOR THE RECOVERY OF COMPENSATION
FOR INJURY CAUSED TO PROPERTY.
1949 [21st May, 1930.]
Cap. 146.
PI38 of 54. ART.
24 of 58.
PRELIMINARY.
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Recovery of Compensa-
tion for Injury to Property Law.

8 Recovery ofCompensationfor Injury toProperty. [CAP.84. 3 i
2. In this Law- ~~~.rpreta-
II animals "  means any camel, horse, mare, gelding,
bull, OX, cow, heifer, steer, calf, mule, donkey, hog, pig
or sow ;
II Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the
District in which the property damaged or destroyed
is situated or the damage or destruction has been caused,
and includes any person appointed by the Governor
under the provisions of section 19 of this Law;
8 II complainant" means the owner or occupier, or
his representative, of any property to which any
damage or destruction has been caused by persons
unknown or by undetected animals or by undetected
sheep or goats ;
II damage or destruction "  includes the abstraction,
detachment or uprooting of property capable of being
abstracted, detached or uprooted ;
II owners of sheep or goats "  means every inhabitant
who is an owner of sheep or goats, and every owner of
sheep or goats who within seven days prior to the date
of a  discovery of any damage or destruction is known
to have grazed sheep or goats, either persona1ly or
through a  shepherd, within the lands of the yillage in
which the said damage or destruction is  discovered ;
II property" means any tree, plant, yine, fruit, 2 of 26fa3.
vegetables, crops (whether standing or otherwise) or
other agricultural produce whether raw or partýyor
wholly treated or manufactured; any mandra, fence,
wall or boundary mark; any beehive; any weir,
dam, sluice, aqueduct or other construction or article
made or used for the purpose of irrigation or drainage ;
any animals as defined in this section; and any ram,
sheep or goat ;
II tax-paying inhabitants "  includes-
8 (a) every inhabitant o~ not less than eighteen
years of age who ýs assessed for any form of
taxation ;
(b) every male inhabitant of a like age who is not
assessed for any form of taxation ;
(c) the superintendent of any monastery, metochi
or teke and the occupier of any chiftIik
situated within the lands of any yillage ;
II village "  means any yillage and includes any town
or quarter of any town to which this Law or any of the

o
provisions of this Law, whether partly or wholly, have
been made applicable by an Order of the Goveroor in
Council.
PART ll.
RECOVERY OF COMPENSATION AND PROCEDURE.
Lý:'erso
blntS 3. (1) Where any damage or destruction has been caused
ýa e o pay
dd.
alcompensa- to property by persons unknown or by un etecte amm s
tion. the tax-paying inhabitants of the yillage or villages within
8the lands of which the property is situated or the damage
or destruction has been caused shall be liable to pay com-
pensation to the complainant as hereinafter provided:
Provided that where property situated within the lands
of a  village has been deliberately removed to the lands of
another yillage for the purpose of causing damage or
destruction thereto within the lands of the last mentioned
yillage, then and in every such case the damage or destruc-
tion shall be deemed to have been caused within the lands
of the village from which such property was removed:
20/24/35. Provided also that no compensation shall be payable
where the damage or destruction caused to such property
2(a) of 38/54. is under one pound in value.
(2) Where any damage or destruction has been caused to
trees, fruit or crops by undetected sheep or goats, the
own~rs of sheep or goats of the village within the lands of
which the damage or destruction has been caused shall be
solely liable to pay compensation to the complainant as
hereinafter provided :
3 of 24/35. Provided that no compensation shall be payable where
the damage or destruction caused to such trees, fruit or
2 (b) 0/38/54. crops is under fýve hundred mils in value.
~?tice of 4. Where any damage or destruction has been caused to 8
~~~r;:: t~O be property by persons unknown or by undetected animals or
mu~tar and to trees, fruit or crop by undetected sheep or goats and the
palýce. complainant desires to obtain compensation under this
Law, notice in writing of the damage or destruction shall
be given by him or on his behalf as soon as possible by the
mukhtar or any two members of the Commission of the
village within the lan ds of which the property is situated
or the damage or destruction has been caused and to the
police at the nearest police station. Should the damage or
destruction be caused to property situated within the lands

8 i
of more than one village notice sha11 be given to the mukhtar
or any two members of each of the Commissions of every
such village.
5. Upon the receipt of the said notice the mukhtar and Mukhlainta;r antd
bfhC..hcomp an
any two mem ers o t   e ommýssýon or suc person or to inspect
persons as may be appointed by them in that behalf shall damage.
in company with the complainant forthwith inspect such
damage or destruction.
86. (1) Upon such inspection the mukhtar and any two ~ukht,ar.and
members of the Commissian or their representative or tý:=~f:
representatives as aforesaid sha11 estimate forthwith the damage.
amatint which should be payable as compensation in respect
of the damage or destruction which has occurred.
(2) Such estimate shall be reduced into writing and sha11
be signed and sealed by the mukhtar and signed by the
complainant if  he agrees to such estimate.
(3) When such estimate has been signed by the com-
plainant as aforesaid, it shall be final and conclusive as
against the complainant.
(4) if the complainant does not agree with such estimate
as aforesaid, the mukhtar shall forthwith furnish the
complainant with a  copy of such estimate.
(5) if the mukhtar and any two members of the Com-
mission or their representative shall reflise to estimate any
amatint of compensation in accordance with the provisions
of subsection (1) hereof on the ground that the damage or
destruction was not caused by persons unknown, or by
undetected animals or by undetected sheep or goats the
complainant may thereupon apply to the Commissioner
who shall inquire into the matter and if satisfied that the
damage or destruction was so caused sha11 order the mukhtar
and any two members of the Commissian to estimate the
compensation payable in accordance with the provisions
8of this section.
(6) if the mukhtar and any two members of the Com- 40/24/35.
mission or their representative estimate the compensation
as being under the limits prescribed under subsection (1)
or (2) of section 3  of this Law, as the case may be, the
complainant may apply to the Commissioner who sha11
inquire into the matter and if  satisfied that the damage or
destruction was of sý,ých an amatint as would entitle the
complainant to compensation the Commissioner sha11 re-
assess the compensation and shall notify the mukhtar who
shall revise accordingly the estimate previously made.

8  i
~~~:ý:rf 7. (1) Within ten days from the date of the receipt of
.the notice referred to in section 4 of this Law, the mukhtar
,shall-
(a) prepare a list (hereinafter in this Law referred to as
"  the list ") of the tax-paying inhabitants of the
village or the owners of sheep or goats, as the
case may be, and shall sign and seal the list;
(b) allocate the total amount of compensation and
costs and fees incurred and payable under any
Regulations made under this Law amongst
8(i) all the tax-paying inhabitants in equal shares,
if  the damage or destruction has been caused to
property by persons unknown or by undetected
animals, or (ii) all the owners of sheep or goats
in proportion to the number of sheep or goats
owned by each at the date of the discovery of the
damage or destruction, if such damage or
destruction has been caused to trees, fruit or
crops by undetected sheep or goats.
(2) The list shall at the foot thereof contain-
(a) a description of the property damaged or destroyed ;
(b) a statement that the damage or destruction has
been caused by persons unknown or by un-
detected animals or by undetected sheep or
goats, as the cage may be ;
(c) a  statement of the total amount of the compensa-
tion payable and whether such amount has been
agreed upon by the complainant or not;
(d) a statement of the amatint of costs and fees
incurred and payable under any Regulations
made under this Law;
(e) a statement that the total amount of the compensa-
tion and the costs and fees aforesaid have been
allocated amongst all tax-paying inhabitants
8or all owners of sheep or goats, as the case may
be, in accordance with the provisions of su b-
section (1) (b) of this section ;
(1) the amount payable by each tax-paying inhabitant
or by each owner of sheep or goats, as the case
may be.
(3) The mukhtar shall within the said period of ten days-
(a) post a  copy of the list in a conspicuous place in the
village, and

e i
(b) forward a copy of the list to the Commissioner ~
together with a  certifýcate signed and sealed by II
the mukhtar specifying the date on which and
the place in which the copy of the list has been
posted in the viIIage and alsa a copy of the
estimate referred to in section 6 of this Law
duly certifýed by him to be a true copy thereof.
80 {l) The complainant or any person whose name ?bject~ons
appears in the list so posted by the mukhtar as in the l:i~:tions
8 preceding section provided, may within ten days of the thereof.
posting of such list lodge at the office of the Commissioner
an objection in writing, duly signed by him, stating the
grounds upon which such objection is  made.
(2) No objection shall be lodged by the complainant, or
if  lodged shall be valid, unless made on the ground that the
total amatint of the compensation estimated under section 6
of this Law is  inadequate.
(3) No objection shall be lodged by any person whose
name appears in the list, or if  lodged shall be valid, unless
made on all or any of the following grounds-
(a) that the damage or destruction has been caused by
known persons or by animals w hose owners are
known or by sheep or goats whose owners are
known, as the case may be ;
(bY that the damage or destruction has been caused by
accident or that the complainant has been
concerned in or has contributed to, either
directly or indirectly, such damage or destruc-
tion; .
(c) tha~ the tot:al amatint of the compensation payable
ýs excessýve ;
(d) that the total amatint payable has not been
allocated amongst all the tax-paying inhabitants
8or all the owners of sheep or goats, as the case
may be, according to this Law;
(e) that the damage or destruction was not caused
within the lands of the viIIage;
(1) that the person objecting is not a tax-paying
inhabitant of the viIIage or is not an owner of
sheep or goats, as the case may be.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this section contained
no objection shall be lodged, or if  lodged shall be valid, in
any of the following cases:-
(a) by a complainant who has agreed to and signed
Co b2

18 i
the written estimate of compensation payable as
,provided in section 6  of this Law;
(b) (i) by any person whose name appears in the list
of the tax-paying inhabitants when the amount
3 (a) of38/54. payable by him is fýfty mils or under;
(ii) by any person whose name appears in the
list of the owners of sheep or goats when the
3 (b) of38/54. amount payable by him is one hundred mils or
under. -
(5) All objections shall be invalid and no proceedings
8shall be taken thereon unless such objections have been
lodged with the Commissioner within ten days of the posting
of the list and unless such objections comply with the other
requirements of this section :
3 of 26/33. Provided that the Commissioner in his discretion may, for
good cause shown, extend the time within which such
objections may be lodged.
~o~ers ~nd 9. (1) At any time af ter the expiration of ten days from
C~m:i~- the date of the postingdi the list as Ýn section 7  of this Law
sicýýer. provided-
(a) if  no valid objection to the list has been lodged as
hereinbefore prescribed, the Commissioner shall
confýrm the list by a  statement thereon over his
signature to the effect that such list has been
duly confýrmed by him:
Provided that if the Commissioner fýnds that
the name of any person is  wrongly included in or
omitted from the list or that any costs and fees
appearing in the list are in excess of those
prescribed by Regulations made under this Law,
he may revise the list accordingly and confýrm
the same as revised ;
(b) if a  valid obj ection to the list has been lodged as
hereinbefore prescribed, the Commissioner shall 8
hold an inquiry into and shall decide upon such
objection. Upon determination of such inquiry
the Commissioner may-
(i) confýrm the list as it  stands, or
(ii) alter or amend the list as he thinks fýt
and confýrm the same as altered or amended, or
(iii) declare the list to be null and void.
The Commissioner may also award cos-ts and fees incurred
and ,payable under any Regulations made under this Law

8 Recovery ofCompensationfor Injury toProperty. [CAP.84. 9 i
and may ÝncIýýde such costs and fees in the list, or may if
he declares the list to be null and void, issue a  certificate
under his hand declaring the total amount of the costs and
fees and by whom they shall be paid.
(2) The list, when confirmed by the Commissioner in
manýýer hereinbefore provided, and any certificate relating
to costs and fees issued by the Commissioner as hereinbefore
provided, shall be binding on all persons affected thereby
and shall be final and conclusive for all the purposes of this
8 La:. (1) At any inquiry under this Law the Commissioner ~ommis-
shall have power to take evidence and may examine all ~~~~er to
such persons as witnesses as he may think it necessary or evidence.
desirable to examine.
(2) Every witness before being examined shall be required
to take such oath as is customarily administered to persons
of his creed or faith on testifying upon oath before a  court
of justice.
If any witness shall object to take an oath or if the
Commissioner shall be of apinion that the taking of an oath
will have no binding effect on his conscience, he shall be
required to make the following promise and declaration:-
tt i   solemnly promise and declare that the evidence
given by me at this inquiry shall be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth."
Such oath or promise and declaration shall be adminis-
tered by the Commissioner or by any person requested by
the Commissioner to administer the same.
(3) The Commissioner may, either of his own motian, or
on the application of any person, summon any person
residing in Cyprus to attend any inquiry under this Law
and give evidence, or produce any document in his posses-
sion, and may examine him as a  witness, or require him to
8produce any document in his possession, subject to all just
exceptions.
(4) if the person summoned fails to attend, and does not
excuse such failure to the satisfaction of the Commissioner,
the Commissioner may issue a warrant to compel his
attendance, and may order him to payall costs which may
have been occasioned in compelling his attendance, or by
reason of his refusal to obey the summons, and may alsa
fine him in a  sum not exceeding ten pounds, or order him 4 (a) 0/38/54.
to undergo a  sentence of imprisonment not exceeding two
weeks.
b2 (2)

9  i
(5) Any person being required to give evidence upon an
inquiry under this Law who refuses to take an oath, or to
,make a  promise and declaration in lieu thereof, or who re-
fuses to answer any question, or to produce any document
in his possession, and who does not excuse such refusal to
the satisfaction of the Commissioner, shall be liable to be
committed to prison, under the warrant of the Commissioner,
there to remain for a  period not exceeding two months,
4 (b) of38/54. and he shall also be liable to be fined by the Commissioner
in a  sum not exceeding ten pounds : :A
Provided always, that if any witness objects to answer .,
any question, on the ground that it  will tCDd to incriminate
him, he shall not be required to answer the question, nor
be liable to any penalties for refusing to answer.
(6) The Commissioner may take, without oath or promise
and declaration, the evidence of any person who by reason
of immature age ought not, in the opinion of the Com-
missioner, to be admitted to give evidence on oath.
(7) Any person who shall in any way obstruct the course
of proceedings at an inquiry under this Law, shall be liable
to be sentenced by the Commissioner to paya fine not
4 (c) of38/54. exceeding five pounds, or to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding two weeks.
(8) Where any person has been sentenced to paya fine
under any of the provisions of this section, the Commis-
sioner shall have power to enforce payment thereof, in the
same manýýer as a  Court. has power to enforce the payment
Cap. 155. of fines under the provisions of the Criminal Procedure
Law, or any amendment thereof.
Recoveryof 11. (1) Every person whose name is in the list shall,
~fo~~ensa- wjthin sixty days of the confýrmation of such list by the
2 of 24/58. Commissioner, pay to the mukhtar, or to any person
appointed under section 17. of this Law, the amount
appeanng therein against his name, at such place and time
8as the Commissioner may direct by notice under his hand
to be posted at conspicuous places in the village.
(2) if any person liable tb make any payment under the
provisions of this Law shall refuse or neglect to pay the
same as in subsection (1) of this section provided, the
Commissioner may forward to the Comptroller of Inland
Reyenue c:ý. certificate under his hand recording the names
pf the persons who have so refused or neglected to payand
the amount due from each such person, and the Comptroller
of Inland Revenue, upon receipt of such certificate, shall~

8 Recovery of Compensation for Injury to Property. [CAP. 84. i
issue a warrant authorizing the collection of the amount
.Idue from each such person, together with any increase as
in subsection (4) of this section provided. i
(3) Every such warrant shall be in the like form, with the
necessary modifýcations, as a warrant issued under the
Tax Collectian Law, and shall be enforced and the like Cap; 329.
proceedings may be had thereon as if it were a warrant
issued under the said Law.
(4) if any amount payable under the provisions of this
8 Law is  not paid as in subsection (1) of this section provided,
such amount shall be increased by twenty-fýve per centum.
12. All coinpensation, costs and fees recovered under this Disposalof
Law shall be disposed by the inukhtar in the manýýer ~=p~~::~
followirig- and fees
(a) by paying to the complainant the amount of the ~e~;~~~..
compensation and the costs, if  any, due to. him;
(b) by paying to any person entitled thereto any costs
and fees due to such person;
(c) by retaining for himseli any costs and fees to which
he may be entitled ;
(d) by remitting to the Department of the Accountant-
General any costs and fees due to the Govern-
ment;
{e) by retaining in separate account any amount
imposed by virtue of the provisions of section 14
of this Law to be devoted as provided by that
section.
PART III.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
813. The total amount of compensation recoverable under Limitation
this Law s~all not exceed four hundred pounds for damage ~~:ý~~s~: of
or destructýon caused to property by persons unknown or tion re-
by undetected animals, and sh~ not exceed two h~ndre.d ~o~~~~~
pounds for damage or destmctýon caused to trees, fmýt .
or crops by undetected sheep or goats.
14. Where, on the allocation of the amount of compensa- Adjustment
.
dfIIh..hb.ttof amounts
týon, costs an ees amongst a t   e tax-payýng ýn a ý an s  allocated
or all the owners of sheep or goats, as the case may be, it when not
appears that the amount payable by any tax-paying ~i~:~nted
inhabitant or any owner of sheep or goats Ýs not repre- current in
Cypruþ,

12 CAP. 84.] Recovery of C ompensation for i njury to Property. O i
sen te d  by any coin current in Cyprus, the mukhtar or the i
Commissioner, as the case maybe, shall increase the amount i
to be paid by every such tax-paying inhabitant or every i
.such owner of sheep or goats by the addition thereto of so
many mils as shall raise to a  sum which is represented by
a  coin which is current in Cyprus, and the amount which
is thereby found to exceed the total amount payable by
the tax-paying inhabitants or the owners of sheep or
goats shall be devoted by the mukhtar to some charitable
purpose in the village approved by the Commissioner. 8
R:m~~r- 15. if at any time af ter the confýrmation of the list by the
;n~~ etc.. Commissioner as hereinbefore provided, the persons who
C
dausing or whose animals or sheep or goats have caused the damage
amage or
d.
hallbd.
dhbldestruction or estructýon s e ýscovere, t  e amount paya e
are dis
d-under such list bY the tax-payin
ginhabitants or the owners
covere.
of sheep or goats, as the case may be (whether the same or
any part thereof has been actually paid or not), may be
recovered from such person~ by the Village Commission
by an action before a  Court of competent jurisdiction, and
when recovered shall be paid to the tax-paying inhabitants
or the owners of sheep or goats who have paid or are liable
to pay it.
When both 16. When there is both a  Christian and Moslem mukhtar
Christianand in any village or quarter of a village the mukhtar to perform
:~~far in a  the duties or do any acts imposed upon mukhtars under
viIIage or this Lawand to receive any fees prescribed by any Regula-
quarter. tions made under this Law shall be the mukhtar of the
community to which the complainant belongs.
Defaulting 17. When a mukhtar or a member of a Village Comniission
:~khtars is unable or unwilling or neglects or refuses to perform
m.embers of any of the duties or do any of the acts imposed upon
:ý~~~~~~om- mukhtars or members of Village .Co.mmissions, as the c;ase
83 of 24/58. may be, by this Law, the Commýssýoner may at any týme
by writing under his hand appoint a  fýt person to perform
the said duties or do the said acts, and the duties or acts
performed or done under this Law by the person so
appointed as aforesaid shall be as valid and effective as if
performed or done by the mukhtar or by a  member of the
Village Commission, as the cage may be.
Commis-
~~~e~ke 18. The Commissioner may, in any case of doubt or
directions of difficulty arising in the administration of any of the
Attomey-
General.

8 Recovery of Compensation for Injury to Property~ [CAP. 84. 13 i
provisions of this Law, apply to the Attorney-General
for directions in the matter.
19. The Governor may from time to time by writing Power to
dh.hd.
tii.f   hGovernor to
un er ýs an appoýn any t  person to exercýse any o t  e  appoint
powers or perform any of the duties or do any of the acts perso!ls to
td..dthC..bh.Lexercýse ves e ýn or ýmpose upon e ommýssýoner y  t  ýs aw, powers, etc.,
and the powers, duties or acts exercised, performed or done O.f Commis-
under this Law by the person so appointed as aforesaid sýoner.
8shall be as valid and effective as if  exercised, performed or
done by the Commissioner.
20. (1) (a) Any mukhtar or other person appointed as in Offenc~ and
section 17 of this Law provided,who shall refuse or neglect penaltýes.
without reasonable excuse to perform any duty or do any
act to be performed or done under this Law, or who shall
knowingly make any false estimate of any damage or
destruction, or who shall post in the yillage or forward to
the Commissioner any list false in any material particular ;
or
(b) Any person who shall prevent or obstruct any
mukhtar or other person appointed, as in section 17 of this
Law provided, to perform any duty or do any act to be
performed or done under this Law; or
(c) Any person who shall prevent or obstruct the Com-
missioner or other person appointed as in the preceding
section provided, to exercise, perform or do any power, duty
or act to be exercised, performed or done under this Law;
or
(d) Any person who acts in contravention of any Regula-
tions made under this Law,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on
conviction to a  iine not exceeding twenty pounds or to 6 of 38/54.
8imp~sonment not exceeding three months or to both such
pumshments.
(2) Any person who shall in any inquiry by the Com-
missioner under this Law give false evidence, whether on
oath or otherwise, shall be guilty of an offence, and, on
conviction, shall be liable to imprisonment for any term
not exceeding seven years.
Power to
21. (1) The Governor in Council may by Order make ~verno~ý
Regulations to be published in the Gazette for carrying out ~~ ~a~~cý
the purposes of this Law. Reg-ýýlations.

tO i
(2) In parl;icular and without prej';ldice to the generality
Iof the foregomg power, such Regulatýons may-
(a) make provision for the practice and procedure to
be observed at any inquiry by the Commissioner
under this Lawand for any matters connected
therewith ; .
(b) fýx the costs and fees to be paid in respect of any
act, matter or thing under this Law to be done
or observed ;
(c) prescribe the forms to be used under this Law. 8
Non:. 22. This Law shall not apply to property situated or
~f~~~ damaged or destroyed within the lands of the following
to towns, but towns-
power to
N..
Goveroor ýcosýa,
in Council Limassol
to apply it to
Kt...'1  d.
Phtowns or ýma, mc u mg ap os,
quarters. Lamaca, including Scala,
Famagusta, including Varosha,
K yrenia :
Provided that the Governor in Council may by Order to
be published in the Gazette direct that this Law or any of
the provisions of this Law, whether wholly or partly; shall
be applied to property situated or damaged or destroyed
within the lan ds of any of the said towns or of any quarter
of the said towns, and from and af ter the date of the
publication of such order, or such date as may be named
in the order, this Law or such provisions of this Law as
may be specifýed in the Order shall be in full force and effect
in respect of property situated or damaged or destroyed
within the lands of the town or quarter to which such order
refers.
8