

i
e CAP. 86.
CYPRUS
8
RENT (CONTROL)
CHAPTER 86 OF THE LAWS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
c. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54. GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
[A ppointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.J
1959

2 CAP.86.] RENT (CONTROL). ~ i
CHAPTER 86.
.RENT (CONTROL).
ARRANGEMENT OF'SECTIONS.
Section Pagý
1 Short title ~ 8
PART I.
PRELIMINARY.
2 Interpretation 3
3 Application of Law... 5
PART II.
RENT AND PREMISES.
4 Restriction on ineýeasing rent 6
5 Charging, etc., of premium, etc., prohibited 6
6 Statement of standard rent to be supplied by Iandiord... ...7
7 Permitted increase of rent 7
8 Limitation as to permitted increase of rent 8
9 Penalty for accepting excess rent 8
PART III.
RENT ASSESSMENT BOARDS.
10 Establishment of a Rent Assessment Board 9
11 Powers of the Board 9
12 Apportionment of rent in case of subletting 10
13 Orders of Board final II
14 Review of orders of the Board ". 11
15 Power of Board to state specÝaI case for decision of Supreme Court ...11
16 Supreme Court may call for proceedings of the Board ...12
17 Enforcement of orders of the Board 12
PART LV.
RECOVERY OF POSSESSION.
18 Restriction of ejectment ". 12
19 Compensation to the tenant in certain cases 15
820 Grant of new lease to the tenant in certain cases 16
21 Misrepresentation, etc., on obtaining judgment or order ...17
22 Power of Court to impose conditions ...'.0 ...17
PART V.
MISCELLANEOUS.
23 Conditions of statutory tenancy 17
24 Effect of order of possession on sub-tenants 17
25 Regulations and Rules 18
26 SaVÝng 18

8 RENT (CONTROL). [CAP. 86.; 3 i
A LAW TOAMEND AND CONSOLIDATE THE LAW CONTROLLING i
AND RELATING TO RENT AND MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO.
[3rd March, 1954.] 13 of 54.
58 of 55.
1. This Law may be cited as the Rent (Control) Law. Short title.
PART I.
e PRELIMINARY.
2. In this Law, unless the context otherwise requires- Interpreta-
ii  Board" means the Rent Assessment Board tion.
established under this Law for the rent restriction area
in which any premises in question are situate ;
ii business premises "  means any premises let for any
business, trade or professional purposes and used as
such;
'i  dwelling-house" means a building or part of a
buildÝýýg, let as a  separate dwelling and used wholly
or chiefly as such;
'i landlord" includes, in relation to any premises,
any person, other than the tenant, who is or would be,
but for the provisions of this Law, entitled to possession
of the premises, and in case of sub-tenancy a tenant who
sublets the premises or any part thereof ;
ii prescribed date "  means the date prescribed under
subsection (3) of section 3  ;
'i premises " includes .any dwelling-house and
business premises ;
e"  rent "  includes any sum paid as rent or hire for the
use of furniture where premises are let furnished or
where premises are let and furniture therein is hired
by the landlord to the tenant:
Provided that this interprefation shall not apply to
any agreement for the letting and hiring of furnished
rooms with board ;
'i  rent restriction area" means any area in the
Colony declared as such by an Order of the Governor
in Council ;

4- CAP.86.] RENT (CONTROL). G i
"standard rent" means-
I(a) the rent at which the premises were let on the
prescribed date : '
Provided that where, in any agreement or
lease entered into before the prescribed date,
there is a provision for an increase in rent
during the term of the agreement or lease,
"  standard rent "  means such agreed increased
rent from the date at which the increase is
agreed to take effect ; 8
(b) where the premises were in existence but were not
let on the prescribed date and were subse-
quently let, or where the premises were, or
are, erected af ter the prescribed date, a  rent
to be assessed by the Board :
Provided that, in respect of a  rent restric-
tion area deemed to have been declared as
such under the proviso to subsection (1) of
section 3, "standard rent" shall mean the
rent of the premises as at the fýrst day of
March, 1941, or in the cage of premises which
were then unlet, unoccupied or unbui1t, the
rent at which the premises were fýrst let af ter
the fýrst day of March, 1941, and, if  not so let,
the rent which, in the absence of agreement,
may be fýxed, by the Board ;
"statutory tenant" means a tenant who, at the
expiration or determination of his tenancy continues
to be in possession of the premises ;
"tenancy" means. any lease, demise, letting or
holding of premises whether in writing or otherwise,
by virtue whereof the relationship of landlord and
8tenant is created, but does not ÝncIlide the letting
or hiring of fumished rooms with board ;
"  tenant" means the tenant of premises in respect
of which a  tenancy exists and includes-
(a) a  statutory tenant;
(b) any sub-tenant and any other person deriving
a right from the original tenant or sub-tenant
~ to possess the premises ;

8 RENT (CONTROL). [CAP. 86. 5 i
(c) the widow of a  tenant who was residing with
Ihim at the time of his death, or, where atenant
leaves no widow or is a woman, suçh member ot
the tenant's tamilyas was residing with the
tenant tor not less than six months immediately
before the death ot the tenant as may be decided,
in default of agreement, by the Court trying the
case.
a 3. (1) When~ver it appears to t~e Governor in Council, ~fPEc::ion
., for the well-bemg of the communýty, to be necessary or
expedient for the purpose of securing the availability of
premises at equitable rents and the security of the possession
thereof, or where the public interest otherwise so requires,
the Governor in Council may by Order (hereinafter referred
to as tt the Control Order "), declare any area in the Colony
as a rent restriction area and thereupon the provisions of this
Law shall apply to any premises within such area :
Provided that any rent restriction area existing at the time
of the coming int o operation of this Law shall be deemed to
be a  rent restriction area declared on such date under this
subsection.
(2) The Governor in Council may, by a notifýcation in the
Gazette, exempt or except any premises or class or group
of premises within a rent restriction area from the operation
of this Law either absolutely or conditionally :
Provided that any premises within a rent restriction area
exempted or excepted by the Governor in Council under the
provisions of the Law hereby repealed shall be deemed to
have been exempted or excepted under this subsection.
(3) The Governor in Council, on making a Control Order
or at any time thereafter, may prescribe adate, as the
18 material date for the determination of the standard rent.
(4) The Governor in Council may, if satisfýed that the
circumstances which led to the making of a Control Order
have ceased to exist or that public interest otherwise so
requires, cancel such Order and upon such cancellation the
provisions of this Law shall, subject to any conditions which
may be inserted in such Order, cease to apply to such area.
.

""!I'~
I'o""c;:,c~""", .",
6 CAP. 86] RE NT (CONTROL). 9
"'ii" ---
PART ll.
RENT AND PREMISES.
Re~trictio? 4. (1) Save as hereinafter in this Law provided it shall
on rncreasýngbIff.'
rent. e un aw ul or any landlord to ýncrease or attempt to
increase or to receive or recover a  rent in respect of any
tenancy of premises, to which this Law applies, in excess of
the rent fixed by an order of the Board, or if  no order has
8been made in excess of the standard rent.
(2) Where as a  result of any transfer to a  tenant of any
burden or liabiIity previously borne by the landlord, the
terms on which premises, within a  rent restriction area, are
held are on the whole less favourable to the tenant than the
previous terros, the rent shall be deemed to be increased
whether or not the sum periodically payable by way of rent
is  increased.
(3) A tenant who has paid his landlord a  sum in excess
of the rent which may lawfully be received under the
provisions of this section may recover such sum from the
landlord.
Charging, 5. (1) No person shall-
etc., of ..
premium, (a) as a condýtýon of the grant, renewal, transfer or
etc
t.
ff.h.
hpr~hibited. co~ ýnuance o  .a tenan~y o premýses, to w ýc
thýs Law applýes, requýre the payment of any
fine, premium or other like sum or the giving of
any other valuable consideration in addition
to the rent ;
(b) as a condition of giving up possession of any
premises, to which this Law appIies, ask or
receive from any person the payment of any
sum or the- giving of any valuable consideration, 8
and any sum or other valuable consideration paid or given
in contravention of the provisions of this subsection shall be
recoverable by the person by whom it  was paid or given.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-
section (1) shall be guilty of an offence and shal1be liable on
conviction by a  President, District Court or District judge
to a fiile not exceeding one hundred pounds and for a second
or subsequent offence shall be liable to a fine not exceeding
two hundred pounds :
.

8 RENT (CONTROL). [CAP. 86.~__. i
Provided that no proceedings sha11 be taken under this
,subsection without the previous conseni in writing of the
Attorney-General, i
6. A landlord of premises, to which this Law applies, Statement of
hIIb.
t  d."bh.tt1standard
S a on eýng reques e ýn wntýng y ýs enan, supp y  rent to be
him with a statement in writing specifying the standard rent ~upSlie~ by
of the premises and if without reasonable excuse he fails an or .
within fourteen days to do so, or supplies a statement which
is false in any matenal particular, he shall be guilty of an
8 offence and sha11 be liable to a  fýne not exceeding twenty-
fýve pounds,
7. (1) AlandIord may increase the rent of premises, to ~ermitted
h,
hh.L1.1f  IIýncrease of
W ýc t   ýs aw app ýes, on y  as o ows :- rent.
(a) where the landlord has since the date of the
Control Order incurred expenditure on the
improvement or structural alteratiofis of the
premises (not including expenditure on re-
decoration or repairs, whether structural repairs
or not) by an amount calcnlated at a rate
per annum not exceeding ten per cent um of the
expenditure so incurred :
Provided that in respect of rent restnciian
areas deemed to be declared as such under the
proviso to subsection (1) of section 3, such date
sha11 be the first day of March, 1941 ;
(b) (i) where immovable property tak and rat es
payable by the landlord have increased since the
premises were let to the tenant, by an amount
of such increase ;   or
(ii) where tates payable by the landlord have
beeome payable since the premises were let to
8 the tenant, by the amount of such rates;
(c) by an amount representing such percentage as may
be fýxed from time to time by the Governar in
Council,
(2) Notwithstanding anything in subsection (1) contained,
in the cage of premises, to which this Law appIies, situated
within a  rent restnction area deemed to have been declared
as such under the proviso to subsection (1) of section 3, a
landlord may, as from the date of the coming into operation
of this Law, and in addition to any increase provided in
i

"i:"W"'ö"7;ýJ;ý:""C"
I,O'e'":": "c: \
8 CAP. 86.] RENT (CONTROL). ~ G
paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (1) but in lieu of the
Iincrease provided in paragraph (c) thereof, increase the rent
by any amount agreed upon between himseli and the tenant,
or failing such agreement, by an amount not exceeding one
hundred per centum in the case of dwelling-houses and two
hund~ed and seventy-five per centum in the case of business
premýses :
Provided that the Goveroor in Council may at any time
vary the rate of increase provided by this subsection :
Provided further that where the rent to be paid under this 8
subsection by a statutory tenant under a contract of tenancy
entered into on or af ter the sixth day of june, 1946, is  less
than the rent provided by such contract, such tenant shall
continue to pay the rent provided by such contract.
Limitation 8. (1} Nothing in this Law shall be taken to authorize
~::itted any increase of rent except in respect of a  period during
increase of which, but for the provisions of this Law, the landlord would
rent.. be entitled to obtain possession.
(2) Notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary,
where the rent of any premises to which this Law applies, is
increased, no such increase shall be due or recoverable until,
or in respect of any period prior to the expiry of, four weeks,
af ter the landlord has served upon the tenant a valid notice
in writing of his intention to increase the rent :
Provided that where an increase in rent has been
perrnitted on account of an increase in rates, such increase in
rent shall be payable by the tenant one week af ter the service
~ of a  notice on him and shall be payable as from the date
when the increase jn rates became operative, and, if there
has, since such date, been a change of tenant, such increase
in rent shall be payable by each tenant in respect of the
period during which he was tenant of the premises.
Penalty for 9. Where the landlord of any premises, to which this Law 8
acceptýng
1.
t1kth1dbexcess rent. app ýes, or anyagen, c er ,  or o er person emp oye y
him, accepts any rent in respect of such premises which
exceeds t4e standard rent thereof by more than any amatint
perrnitted under this Law, or, accepts an advance of rent
exceeding two months' standard rent, then, without
prejudice to any other remedy under this Law, such
landlord, agent, clerk, or other person shall be liable on
conviction by a  President, District Court, or District judge
to imprisonment not exceeding six months or to a  fine not

8 --RENT (CONTROL): [CAP. 86. 9 i
exceeding one hundred pounds or to both such irnprison-
Irnent and fýne ;  and the Court by which he is convicted rnay
order that the rent or advance so far as it exceeds the
arnount perrnitted under this Law shall be irrecoverable,
and that the arnount of any such excess shall be repaid to
the tenant:
Provided that no proceedings shall be taken under this
section without the previous consent in .writing of the
8 Attorney-General.
PART III.
RENT ASSESSMENT BOARDS.
ýo. (1) A Rent Assessrnent Board shall be established for Establish-
each rent restriction area within the Colony consisting of a  ~:~: of a
President and such other Inerfibers as rnay be appointed by Assessment
the Governor by notifýcation in the Gazette. Board.
(2) Three Inerfibers of the Board of whorn the President
shall be one, shall form a  quorurn, and the opinion of the
rnajority of the Board present shall be decisive upon any
Inatter :
Provided that in case of an equality the President shal1
have a casting vote.
(3) The proceedings of the Board shall be deerned to be
judicial proceedings and shall be open to the public and
rninutes of the sarne including a  note of any oral evidence
given before the Board shall be kept by the President.
(4) All surnrnonses and notices, issued under the hand of
the President shall be deerned to be issued by the Board.
(5) Any interested party rnay be represented before the
Board by an advocate.
8 ll. (1) The Board shal1 have power to do all things which Powers of
it  is required or ernpowered to do by or under the provisions the Board.
of this Law, and in particular shall have power-
(a) to hear and deterrnine any application or proceeding
for the purpose of fýxing the standard rent or the
reasonable rent under the provisions of this Law
or of fýxing or apportioning the rent of prernises
to which this Law applies, where such rent is
not govemed by the provisions of an existing
valid contractual tenancy ;

~ oC GAP. ~.] RENT (CONTROL). 18 i
(b) where the rent chargeable in respect of any
furnished premises includes a payment for water,
light, conservancy, sweeper, watchillan, or other
service charge in addition to the standard rent..
to fix the amount of such payment or service
charge ;
(c) where a  dwelling-house is  occupied by tenants who
enjoy common services, such as water, light,
conservancy, sweeper or other common service,
to fix a  rent inclusive of the standard rent and 8
a payment for water, light, conservancy,
sweeper, watchman or other service charge ;
(d) to examine any witness on oath, to summon any
person to appear before it.. and to require any
interested party or witness to produce any
relevant document, as the Board may think fit ;
(e) to award costs of proceedings before it, and to direct
that costs shall be taxed upon such scale,
provided by any Rules of Court in force fOT the
time being in respect of judicial proceedings, as
the Board may direct.
(2) Where the premises concerned in any application or
proceeding before the Board are sublet by the tenant either
wholly or in part, the Board may, in addition to fixing the
rent in respect of the tenancy of the premises as a  whole,
fix the rent of any portion thereof which is separately
sublet.
(3) Any person claiming to be interested in any pro-
ceedings before the Board may apply to be made a  party
to such proceedings and the Board shall give all interested
parties an opportunity of being heard and of producing such
evidence, oral or documentary, as seems relevant to the
Board. 8
App~rt:on-t 12. Where the tenant of any premises to which this Law
:e~as~ ~;n applies, within a  rent restriction area has sublet any part of
subletting. such premises then the tenant or any sub-tenant of that or
of any other part of such premises may at any time apply to
the Board to apportion the rent of the whole premises as
between the tenant and all the sub-tenants of any part or
parts of the whole premises and to determine the rent of all
or any one or more part or parts of the whole premises
sublet to any and every sub-tenant thereof and the Board

e RENT (CONTROL). [CAP. 86. 11 i
shall thereupan make such an apportionment and determina- i
tion:
Provided that the total of the rents payable to the
tenant by all the sub-tenants shall not in the aggregate
exceed one hundred and ten per centum of the rent of the
whole premises af ter making an apportioned reduction in
respect of any part of the premises retained by the tenant
or not sublet by him:
a Provided further that when any application is made to the
-Board under the provisions of this section all sub-tenants of
the tenant shall be deemed to be interested parties in the
proceedings and shall be given an opportunity of being
heard and of producing such evidence, oral or documentary,
as seems relevant to the Board, and may, if  the Board so
directs be joined as parties in the proceedings.
13. An order of the Board shall, subject to the provisions Orders of
'of section 14, be final and, subject to the provisions of Board final.
sections 15 and 16, no appeal shalllie against it.
14. An order of the Board may be reviewed, varied or set Review of
aside by the Board in the following cases, namely ,- ~~e~~~:d.
(a) where the facts of the case affecting the question of
rent have materially altered since the order was
made;
(b) where the order was made in consequence of any
fraud, misrepresentation or mistake ;
(c) where fresh evidence of a material nature which
, could not by the exercise of reasonable diligence
! have been produced when the order was made,
is available;
(d) where the order was made in the absence of any
a necessary or proper party whose absence was not
-due to any default or neglect on his part;
(e) where in the apiýýion of the Board some substantial
wrong or miscarriageof justice is  occasioned by
theorder.
15. (1) The Board may at any stage of an application or Power of
proceeding before it, res~rve for the .c?nsi~eration of .the ~~~~~ :ial
Supreme Court any questýons of law ansýng ýn such applica- cage ftr
tion or proceeding, in the form of a S
pecial case which shall- d
Secision of
.upreme
(a) be dra\vn up by the Presýdent of the Board, and Court.
c. d2

12- CAP. 86.] RENT (CONTROL). .i
sha11 set out shortly the facts on which the law
is  to be applied and the question or questions of
law to be determined;
(b) be sent by the President of the Board to the
Registrar of the Supreme Court ;
(c) be sent down for argument in such manýýer as the
Supreme Court directs.
(2) The Supreme Court sha11 hear and determine the
question or questions of lawarising on such special cage and 8
shall thereupon remit the matter to the President with the
opinion of the Court thereon and such opinion shall be
binding on the Board.
~p~me 16. (1) The Supreme Court either of its own motion or
cal~ fo:nay on the appIication within fourteen days of any party
p~~ee.ýÝngsd aggrieved by a  decision of the Board on the ground that it  is
o e  oar. wrong in law, may ca11 for the proceedings and the grounds
of the order and give such orders thereon, either by directing
a  fresh hearing or otherwise, as seems necessary to secure
that substantial justice is  done.
(2) This jurisdiction may be exercised by a single J udge.
~f ~~~:rý:ent 17. An order of the Board or a copy thereof certifýed to be
of the Board. a true copy by the President of the Board sha11, upon being
fýled with the Registrar of the District Court of the District
within which the premises affected by the order are gittiate,
be executed and obedience thereto enforced as if it were
an order of the Court.
PART ýv.
RECOVERY OF POSSESSION.
Restriction
18(1)N.dtdf.
thfof ejectment .o Ju gmen or or er or e recovery o
8.possession of any premises, to which this Law appIies, or
for the ejectment of a  tenant therefrom, shall be given or
made except in the following cases :-
(a) where any rent lawfully due was in arrear for
twenty-one days or upwards af ter notice of
demand in writing has been given to the tenant
and there was no tender thereof before the
institution of the action :
Provided that rent sha11 be deemed to have
been tendered under this paragraph if it has

8 ...::- RENT(CONTROL). [GAP. 86 i
.been sent by prepaid registered post to the
person entitled to receive the same ;  or
(b) where any obligation of the tenancy other than the
payment of rent (whether under the contract of
tenancy or under the provisions of this Law), so
far as the obligation is consistent with the
provisions of this Law, has been broken or not
performed by the tenant and the Court considers
it reasonable that such judgment or order be
8 given or made ;  or
(c) where the tenant or any other person occupying the
premises under him has been guilty of conduct
constituting a  nuisance or persistent annoyance
to persons in the same or neighbouring premises
or of causing or permitting the use of the
premises for iIlegal or immoral purposes ;  or
(d) where the condition of the premises has, in the
opinion of the Court, deteriorated owing to acts
of waste by, or the neglect or default of, the
tenant or where the tenant has wrongfuIly
caused or suffered to be caused substantial
damage to the premises ;  or
(e) where the tenancy has been determined by notice
to quit given by the tenant; or
(i) where the tenant, by taking in lodgers or by sub-
letting or otherwise parting with the possession
of the whole or any part of the premises, is
making a  profit, whether directly or indirectly,
which, having regard to the rent paid by the
tenant is unreasonable and the Court considers
it reasonable to give such judgment or make
such order; or
8 (g) where: the premises, being a dweIIing-house, are
reasonably required by the landlord for occupa-
tion as a  residence for himself or any member
of his family whoIly dependent upon him or,
where the premises, being business premises, are
reasonably required for the occupation by the 2  of 58/55.
landlord, his spotise, his son, daughter, son-in-
law or daughter-in-Iaw, who are over eighteen
years of age, and in either cage the Court
considers it reasonable to give such judgment
or make such order:
d2 (2)

14CAP. 86.]RENT (~ONTROL)., ý9 i
Provided that-.:.-
,(i) no judgment or order shall be made or
given under this paragraph if the tenant
satisfýes the Court that, having regard to all the
circumstances of the cage, greater hardship
would be caused by granting the order or
judgment than by refusing to grant it..
For the purposes of this paragraph the
expression ýý circumstances of the case" shall
8include the question whether other accommoda-
tion is available for the landlord or the tenant,
and the question whether the landlord pur-
chased the premises af ter the date of the coming
into operation of this Law for the purpose of
gaining possession under the provisions of this
paragraph;
(ii) nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed
to permit a  landlord to recoveÝ- possession of a
dwelling-house if by such recovery he or the
member of his family wholly dependent upon
him would be in occupation of, or would acquire
the right to occupy, more than one dwelling-
house at the same time; or
(h) where the premises, being a dwelling-house or part
of a  dwelling-house and having been let to the
tenant in consequence of his employment by the
landlord, are, upon such employment having
come to an end, reasonably required by the
landlord for occupation as a  residence for some
person engaged in his whole time employment ;
or
(i) where the premises are required by the landlord
for the substantia! alteration or reconstruction
thereof in such a way as to affect the premises or
8for the demolition thereof, and the Court is
satisfýed that the landlord has, where necessary,
obtained the necessary permit for such a!tera-
tion, reconstruction or demolition and has given
to the tenant not less than three months' notice
in writing to vacate the premises; or
(j) where vacant possession of the premises is required
for the purpose in order to carry out a scheme of
development or redevelopment under any Town
Planning Law in force for the time being ;  or

e -RENT (CONTROL). [GAP. 86 ~
(k) where the premises or any part thereaf have been
compulsorily acquired under the Land Acquisi- Cap.226.
tion Law or under any other Law empowering
the compulsory acquisition of property ;  or
(l) where the premises are reasonably required for the
purpose of the execution of the statutory duties
or powers of a local authority or for any purpose
which in the opinion of the Court is in the public
interest; or
8 (m) i~ any other cage where the Court considers it
reasonable that such a  judgment or order be
given or made and is satisfýed that suitable
alternatiye accommodation is available for the
tenant or will be available for him when the
judgment or order take effect.
(2) The Court, in granting a judgment or order under this
section, may, subject to the payment by the tenant of any
amount lawfully due or becoming due by him, stay or
suspend its execution or postpone the date of possession for
such period not exceeding one year and subject to such
conditions, if any, as the Court thinks fýt.
(3) For the purposes of this section tt Court "  means the
President of the District Court or a  District judge sitting
alone notwithstanding that by the reason of the amount
involved the cage could not, but for this provision, be within
the jurisdiction of a  President, District Court, or a  District
j udge,
(4) In any proceedings under this section the Court fees
andthe advocatesfees shallbe regulated in accordance with
any Rules of Court in force for the time being on the basis
of the annualrent paid in respect of the premises at the time
of the institution of the proceedings.
8 19. Where by reason of the carrying on by the tenant in ~~:f~~:-
the premises of a  trade or business a  goodwill is attached tena~t in
thereto increaSing the rentalyaiýýe thereof and by reason of certaýncases.
giving up possession of the premises the landlord shall get
the benefýt of such increase whilst the tenant shall suffer a
loss, the Court, in giving a 'judgment or making an order
under section ýs for possession or ejectment, may require the
landlord to pay to the tenant such sum as would appear to
the Court to be sufficient to compensate the tenant for the
loþþ of 'the occupation of the premisesý due regard being had

16 CAP. 86.] RENT (CONTROL): O i
to the benefli derived by the landlord, and effect sha11 not be
given to such judgment or order until such sum is paid.
Grant of new 20. (1) A tenant of business premises, against whom a
lease to the.dt.
dddthtenant in ]U gmen was gýven or an or er was ma e un er e
certaincases. provisions of paragraph (i) or (j) of subsection (1) of
section 18 and whose trade or business has been so attached
for the last fýve years to the premises that he wil1 suffer a
loss if  he removes and carries on his trade or business in other
premises, may, unless awarded a compensation under
esection 19, in cage the new premises sha11 comprise any
business premises, within two months of the giving of the
judgment or of making the order, by serving a notice to this
effect on the landlord, claim the grant to him of a new
tenancy of such business premises, if  any, as more or less will
correspond in dimensions, frontage and location to the
premises occupied by him in respect of which the judgment
or order was given or made on payment of a reasonable rent
and if  the landlord refuses to grant such a tenancy or within
two months of the service of the notice upon him does not
signify his willingness so to do, the tenant may apply to the
Court for the grant of such tenancy, and if the Court
considers that the grant of a  new tenancy is in all circum-
stances reasonable the Court may order the grant of such
tenancy on payment of a reasonable rent and for such period
and on such terms as the Court may, in default of agreement
between the parties, determine to be proper.
(2) For the purposes of this section "reasonable rent "
means rent which, in default of agreement between the
parties, should be determined by the Board :
Provided that, in respect of premises to which this Law
appIies, situated within a  rent restriction area deemed to be
declared as such under the proviso to subsection (1) of
section 3, "  reasonable rent "  means an amount representing
ethree hundred and fýfty per centum of the rent payable for
the premises in respect of which the judgment was given or
the order was made under paragraph (i) or (j) of subsection
(1) of section 18 on the fýrst day of March, 1941, plug
ten per centum of the amount of the costs apportioned for
the construction of the new premises and with regard to
business premises not existing on the fýrst day of March,
1941, the amount which, in default of agreement between
the parties, shall be determined by the Board, due consider-
ation being given to the rent paid for similar premises
erected before the sixth day of June, 1946, in the neighbour-

8 RENT (CONTROL). [GAP. 86. 17 i
hood and to the conditions, dimensions, frontage and other
similar circumstances of such premises.
21. If, af ter a landlord has obtained a  judgment or order M~represen-
f..
ttdth.t..t.btatýon. etc..
or possessýon or e]ec men un er ýs sec ýon, i ýs su se- onobtaining
quently made to appear to the Court that the judgment or judgýneht
dbt.d b.t  t.hImor order.
or er was o aýne y  mýsrepresen a  ýon or t   e concea ent
of material facts, the Court may order the landlord to pay
to the former tenant such sum as appears to be sufficient as
8compensation for damage or 1055 sustained by the tenant as
a  result of the judgment or order.
22. In any application made under this Part the Court Power of
may in its discretion order that in addition to or in substi- ~~::o
tution for any other order which the Court may make either conditions.
party shal1 comply with any conditions, including the
payment by one party to the other of any amount agreed
upon by them, which the Court may think fýt to impose for
giving effect to the purposes of this Law.
PART V.
MISCELLANEOUS.
23. (1) A tenant who, under the provisions of this Law, Conditions
retains possession of any premises shal1, so long as he retains ~f statutory
possession, observe and be entitled to the benefýt of all the enancy.
terms and conditions of the origina! contract of tenancy, so
far as the same are consistent with the provisions of this
Law, and shal1 be entitled to give up possession of the
premises only on giving such notice as would have been
required under the original contract of tenancy :
Provided that in the case of a sub-tenant becoming a
statutory tenant such a  statutory tenant shall in addition
hold the premises subject to any subsisting restrictive
8covenants contained in the terms and conditions of the
tenancy between the landlord and the tenant.
(2) Where the landlord fails to carry out any repairs for
which he is liable, the Court may, on the application of a
statutory tenant, order that the required repairs be carried
out at the cost of the landlord and, if  the landlord fails to
pay the cost of such repairs, to authorize the tenant to carry
out such repairs at lhis ~own cost and defray the amount
thereof from the rent to be paid.
24. (1) ~ere any judgmeý:ýt or ord.er for the recovery ~r~:t~:
of possessýon has been obtaýned agaýnst any tenant of possession on
sub-tenants.

18 CAP. 86.] RENT (CONTROL). e i
'..
premises, such judgment or order shal1 not be enforceable
against any sub-tenant of such tenant unIess the Court is
satisfýed that such tenant was prohibited by the terms of his
tenancy from sub-Ietting or that such sub-tenant has used
the premises for illegal or immoral purposes. Every
judgmeýit or order for possession made against any tenant
shal1 declare whether it shall be enforceable against any
sub-tenant or not.
(2) Any suQ-tenant against whom such judgment or
order is not enforceable shal1, if he remains in possession
8af ter notice of the judgment or order has been served on
him, cease to be a  sub-tenant of the tenant and become a
statutory tenant of the landlord in respect of the premises
comprised in his sub-tenancy.
Regulations 25. (1) The Governor in Council may make such Regula-
and Rules. tions, and give such directions, as he may think fýt for the
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Law.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such Regulations may prescribe-
(a) the practice and procedure of the Board and the
matters which shaII be taken into account by the
Board in exercising its powers under this Law;
(b) the f~es which shall be payable in respect of any
matter or thing to be done under this Law.
(3) The Governor, with the advice and assistance of the
Chief justice, may make Rules prescribing the procedure
for enforting orders of the Board fiIed in the Court under the
provisions of section 17 and prescribing the time within
which any proceedings under the provisions of this Law
may be taken before the Supreme Court and prescribing the
procedure to be followed and the fees to be paid, in respect
thereof.
Sayingo 26. (a) The appointment of any Board appointed under
the Law hereby repealed* shall not be affected 8
and such Board shal1 be deemed to have been
appointed under the provisions of this Law.
(b) Any rent or sum which, during the continuance
of the Law hereby repealed, was not recoverable
by alandlord shal1 not be rendered recoverable
by such landlord.
(c) Atenant shall nqt be precluded from recovering
, from the landlord any increase of rent paid
under an agreement not in writing.
.The Law repealed by this Law was: The Increase of Rent (Restriction) Law,
1949, Cap. 108 and Laws 28 of 1949 and 12 of 1953.
This Law came Ýnto operation on the 15th March, 1954. 54, Vol. II, 121.~