

e --' ' " CAP. 93. i
(YPRUS
8
SIRIVIDHI
CHAPTER 93 OF THE LAWS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
ol Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
!959

: -:, CAP.93.]SIRIVIDHI PREVENTI el
CHAPTER 93.
SIRIVIDHI PREVENTION.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Seclion Page
Ý-L Short title 0 00' .0. ...2
2 Interpretation 000 .0. 0. 2
3 Application of the Law '0' '0' 000 '0' 2
4- Certificate of mukhtar .00 '0' '00 o" 3
5 Committee to divide land into two sections ...00' 3
6 Planting of winter cereals prohibited 000 3
7 Penalýr on planting in contraventian of Law 00. "0 3
8 Order that the Law shall cease to apply 00' '0' '00 3
9 Destruction of cereals pla.ntedin ý;ontravention of Law .., 4-
To PREVENT THE SPREAillNG OF THE WHEAT PEST KNOWN
AS SIRIVIDHI.
1949, [9tk ]  une, 1897.]
Capo 161.
Short titleo ý. This Law may be cited as the Sirividhi Law.
Interpreta- 2. In this Law-
tiono
tt  winter cereals "  means and includes wheat, barley,
oats and Iye.
Application 3. The Governor, upon the petition of the inhabitants of
of the Law
ill.tht  th..fh.
LbÝ-o any V age pýaymg a e proVls1ons o t   ýs aw may e
applied to their yillage, and upon the certifýcate of the
mukhtar that the persons signing the petition form a
majority of the owners and occupiers of the cultivated
arable land in the yillage, may order that the provisiofis of
this Law shall be appIied to the village; and where the
provisions of this Law have been appIied to any yillage the
Governor, with the advice of the Agricultural Eoard, may
declare any yillage or area adjacent thereto to be infected
with the disease of sirividhi, and thereupon the provisions
of this Law sha1l apply to that yillage or area.

8 SIRývýnHI PREVENTIO~. [GAP. 93.~ i
4. Every certificate given by the mukhtar under the Ce
frtifýkhcatte
1di.hallo mu ar.
ast prece ng sectýon S -
(a) state the number of owners and occupiers of
cultivated aralýle land in the yillage ;
(b) name four resident cultivators who shall form a
committee to carry out the provisions of this
Law.
5. As soon as may be practicable af ter the publication of ~~.m.Ýree
,-. an order under section 3, the Committee, under the super- l~nd~v~n~o
..vision of the Commissioner shall divide all the aralýle land two sections.
,
in the village as nearly as may be into two equal sections
and shall decide in which of the sections the planting of
winter cereals shall first be prohibited.
The Committee shall prepare and transmit to the Com-
missioner a statement in writing showing the lands assigned
to each section and specifying the section in which the
planting of winter cereals shall first be prohibited, which
section is referred to in this Law as II the first section."
Three copies of the statement shall be post ed in
conspicuous places in the YÝllage.
6. During a  period .of three ye~rs .from the ýst. of :~~:~ng of
September next followýng the publýcatýon of the notýce cereals
required by the last preceding section, it  shall be unlawful prohibited
to plant any winter cereals in the lands assigned to the
first section; and af ter the expiration of the above-
mentioned period and during a turther period of three
years, the prohibition to grow winter cereals shall cease
to be in force as regards the first section, but shall be in
force as regards the other section; and so that the
prohibition shall apply in tum to the two sections for
altemate periods of three years.
,-. 7. Whoever .pla~ts winter cereals in c<.>ntravention of :l~~~~ t:
..this Law shall be Halýle to a fine not exceeding five pounds; c,;>ntraven-
and the Court may order that aportion of the fine infiicted, ~~ of
not exceeding one-half, shall be paid to any witness or to .
any person who has given information of the commission
of the offence.
8.. When thi? Law has been appJied to a  village for a  ?{:~~:~all
contmuous penod of three years the Govemor may, upon cease to
the petition of the inhabitants, order that it shall cease apply.
to be applied to that yillage.

4 CAP.93.1 SIRIVIDHI PREVENTION. e
Destruction 9. The Commissioner may destroy any winter cereals
of cereafs
h.
hhb1d..fhiLplanted in W ýc ave een p ante ýn contraventýon -O t S aw,
~~~raven- and !he costs incu.rred in such d.estruction shall in the
of Law. fýrst ýnstance be paýd from the agnculturaI fund and may
be recovered by the Commissioner by civiI process trom
the person who has planted thecereaIs.. -
8
.'
"
8!