

8 CAP. 96. i
CYPRUS
8
STREETS AND BUILDINCS
CHAPTER 96 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
c. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV, LONDON, W.I.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statules) Act, 1907.]
1959

~--,c~~ STREETS AN D B U i LD IN GS. --
CHAPTER 96
STREETS AND BUILDINGS.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title o.. 2
82 Interpretation 0 ...00. 2
3 Layout, etc., of streets and erection, etc., of buildings prohibited
without permit of appropriate authority o.. ...3
4 Proposed works to comply with the Lawand Regulations and remedy
with regard to permits not so complying 5
5 Duration of permit and renewaý 0 ...7
6 Power to require construction of street or deposit of proportionate
share in east of construction .0. 8
7 Demolition of bui1dings in dangerous state ...00. 8
8 Plans, etco, to be produced... o.. .0. ...8
9 Conditions by appropriate authority 9
10 Certifica1:e of approval o.. 10
11 Control of streets 0 11
12 Special provisions relating to widening or straightening of streets ...11
13 Space between newand old alignments to be part of street .'0 12
14 Power to appropriate authority to defýne zones 12
15 Power to close buildings unfýt for human habitation o.. ...12
16 Registration 0 ...o.. 000 13
17 Construction, reconstruction and improvement of streets o.. 13
18 Appeals 0.0 16
19 Regulations o.. o.. ...16
20 Offences and penalties ..0 17
21 Fai1ure of appropriate authority to compIr with provisions of Law
and Regulations .0. 19
22 Special power to Governor in certain cases 20
23 Suspension of powers of appropriate authority o.. ...21
24 Permits under Antiquities Law .0' ...'0. 21
25 Government to be exempted 0 ...21
26 Special provisions with regard to Service Departments ...21
27 Saving ..0 o.. 23
1949, A LAW TO CONSOLIDATE AND AMEND THE LAWS RELATING
Cap. 165.
10 of 50. TO THE CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND THE ERECTION
44 of 54. OF BUILDINGS.
18 of 55.
[1Sb12 of 57. st eptem er, 1946.]
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Streets and Buildings 8
Regulation Law.
Int.erpre- 2. In this Law-
tatýon.
2  of 44/54 tt  alteration ", tt  addition " or tt  repair ", when used
with refereýýee to buildings, means any structural
alteration, addition or repair whereby any dimension
of such building is altered but shall not include-
(a) the replacing of tiles, mud or other material in
order to render any roof watertight ;

8 STREET S AND B UILDINGS. [CAP. 96. 3 i
.~ --wc--- -
(b) the repair of any existing door the leaves of
which do not open or project into a  street;
(c) the repair of any window, balcony or verandah
which does not open or project into a  street;
(d) the white-washing, colour-washing, plastering or
painting of any wa11, ceiling, woodwork or
ironwork in any building ;
(e) the relaying, re-boarding or re-paving of any
..floor or pavement contaÝned within the ex-
-ternal wa11s of any building or within any
existing balcony or verandah attached to the
building but which does not open or project
into a street;
"appropriate authority" means the appropriate
authority constituted or appointed under the provisions
of section 3  of this Law, exercising powers in relation to
any relevant matter under the provisions of this Law
within the area in respect of which it  is constituted or
appointed ;
,ý building" means any construction, whether of
st one, concrete, mud, iron, wood or other material, and
includes any pit and any foundation, wa11, roof,
chimney, verandah, balcony, comice or projection or
part of a  buildÝýýg, or anything affixed thereto, or any
wa11, earthbank, fence, paling or other construction
enclosing or delimiting or intended to enclose or delimit
any land or space;
"  municipal corporation "  means a corporation estab-
lished under the provisions of the Municipal Corpora- Cap. 270.
tions Law, or any I..aw amending or substituted for the
same ;
ýý street" includes any road, bridle-path, pathway,
-ý blind alley, passage, footway, pavement or public
ý- square.
3. (1) No person sha11- ~~~~tse:~d
(a) layout or construct a  street .erecti?n~etc..
, of buýldmgs
(b) erect, or sufter or a11ow to be erected a  building or p~~~ib~ed
demolish or reconstruct or make any alteration, ;;r~~ of
addition or repair to any existing building, or approp.riate
ffIIhdlit .authorýty.
su er or a ow any suc em o ýo n or recon- 3(a) of 44{54.
struction or any such alteration, addition or
repair to be made ;

4 CAP. 96.] STREETS AND B UILDINGS. O i
(c) layout or divide any land (irrespective of whether
any buildings, other than buildings used solely ~
for agriculture or forestry, exist thereon or not)
into separate sites;
(d) divide any building (irrespective of whether any
such division necessitates any construction or
not) int o  separate tenements;
(e) start to do any of the works or matters herein-
before set out,
without a permit in that behaIf fýrst obtained from the 8
appropriate authority as in subsection (2) provided.
(2) The appropriate authority within-
(a) any area of a  municipal corporation, shal1 be the
municipal council of such corporation:
Provided that in any rural municipality in lieu
of the municipal council thereof the Govemor
may appoint as an appropriate authority the
Commissioner of the district or a  board consist-
3(b) of 44/54. ing of not more than six persons with the
Commissioner as Chairman.
(b) any area, not being the area of a municipal corpora-
tion, shal1 be the Commissioner of the district :
Provided that in lieu of the Commissioner the
Govemor may appoint as an appropriate
authority for such area a board consisting of
not more than six persons with the Commis-
sioner as Chairman :
3(c) of 44/54. Provided further that in any improvement
area the Govemor may appoint as an appro-
priate authority .for such area the Board
established for that area under the provisions
Cap.243. of the Villages (Administration and Improve-
ment) Law.
(3) For the purposes of paragraph (a) of subsection (2)- Ý-
"  rural municipality" means any municipal corpora-
tion other than the municipal corporations of
Nicosia, Limassol, Famagusta, Lamaca, Paphos
and Kyrenia.
3 of ýo/sO. (4) (a) Where the appropriate authority is the municipal
council of a  municipal corporation, the mayor
or the deputy mayor of such corporation or any
other person authorized by such corporation in
that behalf shal1 have, and shalI always be
deemed to have had, power to issue'any permit,

8 STREETSAND B UILDINGS. [CAP. 96. 5 i
.'.. "",j'i not.ice or any ot he! instrume~t or document
Iwhich such appropnate authonty has power to
issue under the provisions of this Law;
(b) where the appropriate authority is a body ap-
pointed by the Governor as in subsection (2)
provided, the chairman thereof or any other
person authorized by the chairman in that
behalf shall have, and shall always be deemed
8to have had, power to issue any permit, notice
or any other instrement or document which
such appropriate authority has power to issue
under the provisions of this Law;
(c) any permit, notice or other instrement or do cu-
meDt issued as in paragraph (a) or (b) of this
subsection on and af ter the 1st day of Septem-
ber, 1946, shall be deemed to have been properly
issued under the provisions of this subsection.
(5) Where the appropriate authority is the muni-
cipal council of a  municipal corporation, such
council may, from time to time, delegate to an
executive committee consisting of not more than
three members of such council all or any of the
powers conferred upon the council under the
provisions of this Law.
(6) Where for any reason a body is appointed to
have the powers and perform the duties of a
municipal council in respect of any municipal
corporation, such body shall be, during its
term of appointment, the appropriate authority
.for the purposes of this Law as respects such
.corporation and, in any such case, the powers
, and duties of the mayor and deputy mayor
of such corporation, as in this Law provided,
8 shall vest in and be exercised respectively by
the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of such
body.
4. (1) No permit shall be grantedunder section 3  of this Proposed
Law unless the appropriate authority is satisfied that the ::~~~;~ith
contemplated work or other matter in respect of which the the Law, and
permit is sought is in.acco!dance with the provisi.üns of this ~:ýrr~~~~;
Lawand the Regulatýons ýn force for the týme beýngo with regard
...to permits
(2) Where on the appIicatýon of any ýnterested person or not so .
of the Attorney-Generalý it  is proved to the satisfaction of ~ooiiý;;g:

6 ,'.' CAP.96.] STREETS AND B UILDINGS. O i
the Court that a  permit granted on or af ter 2nd February,
.1950, under section 3  of this Law is not in accordance with
the provisions of this Law or the Regulations in force for the
time being, and that there was no undue delay in making
the application, the Court may-
(a) order that, within such time as may be specified
in the order, any work or matter carried out or
done under such permit shall be pulled down or
remove d or so altered as to compIr with the
provisions of the Lawand the Regulations in 8
force for the time being ;
(b) order that the appropriate authority or any
individual members of any such authority who
held office at the time of the grant of the
permit, whether such members are still holding
office or not (hereinafter referred to as "  the
defaulting authority" and "defaulters ", re-
spectively) shall pay to the holder of the permit
affected by an order made under paragraph (a)
hereof, such compensation for any l09S or
damage sustained by such holder in consequence
of anything done under such order, as the Court
may direct:
Provided that no compensation shall be
ordered to be paid under this paragraph, if in
the opinion of the Court the holder of the
permit by his conduct or otherwise had contri-
buted directly or indirectly to the grant of the
permit conceming which the application is
made;
(c) order that the costs of the pulling down or removal
shall be paid by the holder of the permit or by
the defaulting authority or the defaulters or by
such of them in such proportion as the Court
8may direct;
(d) notwithstanding that the Court is of opinion that
the point raised in the application might be
decided in favour of the applicant, dismiss the
application if satisfied that the contravention
is of a minor nature and that it would cause
disproportionate hardship on the holder of the
permit if the application were granted;
(e) make such o~her order as the justice of the cage
may requýre :

18 .STREETS AND B UILDINGS. [CAP. 96. i
Provided that the applicant shall give to the appropriate
Iauthority concerned not less than ten days' notice of his
intention to apply to the Court as in this section provided :
Provided further that no order shall be made under this
subsection against any individual member of an appropriate
authority who proves to the satisfaction of the Court that
he objected to the issue of the permit in respect of which the
application is made.
8(3) An a~p'lication under subsection (2) shal1 be made by
summons cýtýng as respondents the holder of the permýt
and the defaulting authority or the defaulters or both such
authority and defaulters and the procedure prescribed by
the Rules of Court in force for the time being relating to
civil proceedings shall apply :
Provided that, where the appropriate authority is the
Commissioner or a board of which the Commissioner is the
chairman, no application shall be made except by or with
the consent of the Attorney-General:
Provided further that, where the applicant is not the
Attorney-General, the Registrar of the Court, before filing
the application, shal1 require the applicant to give a security
for costs either by depositing five pounds or giving such
other good and sufficient security in that amount to the
satisfaction of the Registrar, in respect of every respondent ;
thereafter, the Court may, at any stage of the proceedings,
order further deposit or further security to be given and if
the applicant fails to make the deposit or give the further
security, the application shall be dismissed.
(4) For the purposes of this section-
i'  Court "  means a  Court of competent jurisdiction ;
"  interested person "  means a  person who is ordinarily
resident within the area in which the property
8 in respect of which the permit was issued is
gittiate and, in the case of a  municipal corpora-
tion, whose name also appears in the electors
roll of that corporation and includes any person
who, though not so resident, owns immovable
property in close proximity to the work or
matter carried out or done under the permit in
respect of which the application is made.
5.. A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of ~e~=~~3f
the ýssue thereof : renewal.

8 CAP. 9~.] STREETS AND BUILD.{NGS, -i
Provided that, if  the work or other matter is not com-
pleted within that period, the permit sha1l be renewable at
any subsequent time if  not conflicting with any Reguýations
in force at the time of such renewal, upon payment of the
fee prescribed for the original permit or of two pounds
whichever is  the less, The permit so renewed shall be valid
for one year from the date of renewal.
Pow~r to 6. (1) The appropriate authority in granting a permit to
requýre
Id.
3fh,L.
construction ay out a  street un er sectýon o t  ýs aw, may ýmpose a
8~f strý;~t ~r condition that the permit holder shall construct the street
p~~~- o within such time as may be specifýed in the permit or sha1l
!ionate share deposit with the appropriate authority such sum of money
~~~:r~~:ion. as in the apiýýion of the appropriate authority would be the
proportionate share of the permit holder in the estimated
cost of constructing the street as a whole, having regard to
the length of the frontage of his property abutting on such
street.
(2) Every sum of money deposited with the appropriate
authority as in subsection (1) provided, shall be utilized
by the appropriate authority for the construction of the
street in respect of which such deposit was made,
~e:~:on 7. Where the demolition, altefatian or repair of any
fn d~ng:~~s building is  rendered necessary in order to secure the satety
state. ot the building or of any other bui1ding in close proximity
thereto or of any passenger on any street and it is not
reasonably possib~e to obtain a  previous permit therefor,
such demolition, alteration or repair may be effected forth-
with provided that notice therefor in writing shall be given
to the appropriate authority within twenty-four hours of the
arising of any such necessity.
Plans, etc., 8. Before granting a  permit under section 3  of this Law,
8~~o~~ced. the appropriate .authority may r.equire the produ,ction of
such plans, drawýngs and calculatýons or may requýre to be
given such description of the intended work as to it may
seem necessary and desiralýle and may require the altefatian
of such plans, drawings and calculations so produced,
particularly-
(a) with the object of securing proper conditions of
health and safety in connection with the build-
ing to which such plans, drawings and calcula-
tions relate ;

18 STREET S AND B UILDINGS. [CAP.96.9 i
(b) with a view to preserving the uniform or proper .
character and st yle ot buildings erected or to be II
erected in the area in which the plot is situated ; !
(c) with the general object ot securing proper conditions
of health, sanitation, safety, communication,
amenity and convenience in the area Ýn which the
intended work is to be carried out.
9. (1) In granting a permit under the provisions of Conditions
8section 3  of this Law, the appropriate authority shall have ~propriate
power, subject to any Reglliations in force for the time authority.
being, to impose conditions as hereinafter, to be set out in
the permit, that is to say-
(a) with regard to the laying out or the construction
of a  street, conditions as to-
(i) its width, length and position ;
(ii) it.s level, inclination and drainage ;
(iii) the materials of which and the manýýer in
which it shall be constructed ;
(iv) the construction of bridges, culverts and
side ditches ;
(v) the widening of any street which adjoins 2(a) of 18/55.
the street to which the appIication relates.
(b) with regard to the erection of any new building or
addition, alteration or repair to any existing
bui1ding, conditions as to-
(i) the materials of which any external wall,
foundation, roof, chimney or other external
portion of a  building shall be constructed and
the size and thickness thereof ;
8(ii) the materials ot which any internal por-
tion of a buiIdiýýg, so far as it  affects the stability
of the buiidiýýg, shall be constructed ;
(iii) the provision to be made for drainage
and sewerage ;
(iv) the provision to be made for the preven-
tion or the spreading of any fire in any building ;
(v) the width of any balcony or erection pro-
jecting over a  street upon which such building
abuts ;

ýo CAP. 96.] STREET S AND B UILDINGS. :o i
(vi) wells, waterclosets, earthclosets, privies,
Ipits, septic tanks, soakaways and cesspools in
or in connection with any bui1ding ;
(vii) the ventilation, lighting and sanitation
of any building in regard to its occupation as a
dwelling house or for any other purpose for
which it may be erected or intended ;
(viii) the use to which the building may be
put ;
(ix) the safety of persons employed for the
8purpose ;
5 of ýo/sO, (x) the construction of suitable pavement in
connection with any new bui1ding.
(c) with regard to the laying out or division of any land
for bui1ding purposes, conclitiofis as to-
(i) the demarcation and size of boundary
marks;
(ii) the installation of adequate water supply ;
(iü) the diversion of natural and artificial
water courses ;
(iv) the levelling of the site;
(v) the construction of streets, ditches, bridges
and culverts ;
2(b) ofl8/55. (vi) the widening ot any street upon which the
land, to which the application relates, abuts.
(2) Where an application is made under section 3  (1) (c)
of this Law in respect of any land having a frontage on an
existing road, the appropriate authority may refuse to grant
a permit to divide that land unless the application includes
the laying out of sites not fronting on to the existing road ;
and the number of such sites shall be in such proportion to
the number of sites fronting on the existing road as the
appropriate authority may at its discretion deem desiralýle. 8
C
fertificateý10. (1) No person shall occupy or use, or cause, permit,
o approva,
ffhb.ld' 4  of 44{54, or su er any ot er person to occupy or use, any uý ýng
unless and until a  certificate of approval has been issued in
respect thereof by the appropriate authority.
(2) The holder of a  permit shall, not later than twenty-
one days from the completion of the work or matter in
respect of which the permit has been granted under the
provisions of section 3  of this Law, notify the appropriate
.

8 STREETS AND B UILDINGS. [CAP. 96. 11 i
authority of such completion and such authority, if  satisfýed i
that the work or matter has been duly completed in ac- ii
cordance with the permit, sha11 fumish the holder with a
certifýcate of approval of the work or other matter in respect
of which the permit has been granted:
Provided that the appropriate authority may, where it  so
thmks fýt and is satisfýed that all requirements of this Law
and the Regulations in force for the time being are complied
with, fumish the holder of the permit with a  certifýcate of
8 approval for part only of the work or matter.
ll. Every street constructed by virtue of a permit Control
granted under the provisions of section 3  of this Law sha11, of streets.
as soon as the certifýcate of approval has been granted, be
deemed to be a public street and sha11-
(a) if  withm the limits of a municipal area, come under
the control of the municipal corporation con-
cemed and thereafter the expense of repairing
and maintainmg such street shall be home by
the municipal corporation;
(b) in every other cage, unless otherwise provided by
any Law in force for the time being, come under
the control of the Govemment and the expense
of repairing and maintaining such street sha11
be home by the Govemment.
12. (1) Notwithstanding anything contamed in this Law, Special
an appropriate authority may, with the object of widening pr
lOVlt:sionts .
h.
tbdrea ýng °
or straýg temng any street, prepare or cause o e prepare widening or
plans showing the width of such street and the direction ~traig
fhtten-
th.
hIIkýng °  s ree s.
t   at ýt s  a ta e. -
(2) When any plans have been prepared under sub-
section (1), the appropriate authority shall deposit such
8plans in its office and sha11 also cause a notice to be published
in the Gazette and in one or more local newspapers to the
effect that such plans have been prepared and deposited in
its office and are open to inspection by the public and such
plans shall be open to the public for mspection, at all
reasonable times, for a  period of three months from the
date of the publication of the notice in the Gazette.
(3) At the expiration of the period set out in sub-
section (2), the plans sha11, subject to any decision by the
Govemor in Council on appeal as in section 18 of this Law
provided, become binding on the appropriate authority
c. i2

~2, CAP. 96..] STREETS AND B UILDINGS; O i
and on all persons affected thereby and no perrnit shall be
issued by the appropriate authority save in accordance with
.such plans.
~~::en new 13. (1) Where a permit is granted by an appropriate
a~d old authority and such permit entails a  new alignment for any
~~lfe~:iS street, in accordance with any plan which has become blýýd-
of street. ing under section 12 of this Law, any space between such
alignment and the old alignment, which is left over when a
perrnit is granted, shall become part of such street without
the payment by the appropriate authority of any compensa- 8
tion whatsoever :
Provided that, if it is established that hardship would be
caused if no compensation were paid, the appropriate
authority shall pay such compensation as may be reason-
able having regard to all the circumstances of the case.
(2) When a. permit is granted under subsection {1), the
District Lands Office shall, upon application by any
interested party, cause the necessary amendments to the
relative registrations to be effected and the amended
registration shall be held final notwithstanding that any
certificate relating thereto remains unaltered.
Powert? 14. (1) The appropriate authority may, with the ap-
:~~~fi~~te proval of the Governor, by notice to be published in the
to define Gazette, define zones-
zones. (a) within which buildings for special trades or indus-
tries may or may not be erected or which shall
be reserved exclusively for residential or other
purposes ;
(b) within which buildings of a lesser value than that
specified in the notice shall not be erected.
(2) N otwithstanding anything in this Law contained,
from and after the publication of a notice under sub-
section (1), no perrnit shall be issued by the appropriate
8authority save in accordance with such notice:
2  of 12/57. Provided that if  the appropriate authority declares itself to
be satisfied that the public interest requires the issue of a
perrnit, the Governor, af ter receiving and considering such
declaration, may, in his absolute discretion, authorise the
appropriate authority to issue a permit otherwise than, in
accordance with such notice.
Power to
~~~ingS 15. The appropriate authority may by order close any
unfit for building which in the apiýýion of the authority is unfit for
human
habitation.

8 STREETS AND B UILDINGS. [C~P. 96. 13. i
human habitation on account of its insanitary, ill-venti-
lated or overcrowded condition or is dangerous for human
habitation on account of its structural defects, and may
prohibit the future use of the building for such habitation
until it shall have been dealt with, rebuilt, altfred or re-
paired in such manýýer as the authority shall determine.
16. N o  registration of any work or matter in respect of Registration.
which a  pemýit is  required under the provisions of section 3
8of this Law shall be effected by the District Lands Office
unless the appIicant produces a certificate of approval
issued by the appropriate authority :
Provided that the production of a  certificate of approval
may be dispensed with in any cage in which the Director of
Lands and Surveys so directs.
17. (1) For the purposes ot this section- Construc-
"  owner "  means the person registered or entitled to be :~~ti~non-
registered in the books of the District Lands and im-
Office as the owner of immovalýlePropert
yprovement
of streets.
affected by a notice published under sub- 5 of 44/54.
section (3) ;
"proper construction, reconstruction and improve-
ment of a street" includes the widening or
reconstruction of the foundations of a street,
proper provision for surface water drainage, the
construction of payements, and the asphalting
or paying of both carriageways and pavements
but shall not ÝncIlide works of maintenance.
(2) Where an appropriate authority considers that a
street should be properly constructed, reconstructed or
improved, such authority may pass a resolution to this
effect and prepareplans and specifications for such work :
8 Provided that where an appropriate al:ýthority is the
municipal council of a  municipal corporation or the Board
of an improvement area or a board appointed by the
Governor under the proviso to paragraph (a) of subsection 2
of section 3  of this Law or under the first proviso tQ para-
graph (b) of subsection (2) of section 3  of this Law, such
resolution shall be taken by majority of two-thirds of the
members of such authority holding office.
(3) When a  resolution has been taken andany plans and
specifications ha~e been prepared under subsection (2), the
i2 (2)

~4 CAP. 96.] STREETS AND B UILDINGS. 8 i
appropriate authority sha1l deposit such plans and specifýca-
Itions in its office and sha1l cause a notice to be published in
the Gazette and in one or more local newspapers to the ~
effect that such resolution has been taken and such plans '
and specifýcations have been prepared and deposited in its
office and that such plans and specifýcations are open to
inspection by the public, at all reasonable times, for a
period of two months from the publication of the notice in
the Gazette.
Such notice sha1l alsa state- 8
(a) the estimated cost of the work ;
(b) any unexpended sum of money deposited with the
appropriate authority under section 6 of this
Law.
,
(c) the names of the owners who will contribute to the
cost;
(d) the proportion in which their contribution shall be
made ;
(e) the number ot years over which such owners may
pay their contribution in equal annual instal-
ments.
(4) Any owner of immovalýle property affected by any
plans and specifýcations prepared and deposited in ac-
cordance with subsection (3) may, within the period during
which such plans and specifýcations are deposited for
inspection, lodge an objection thereto in writing with the
appropriate authority.
(5) Af ter the expiration of the period during which the
plans and specifýcations prepared and deposited for inspec~
tion under subsection (3), the appropriate authority sha1l
submit, through the Commissioner of the district, to the
Governor in Council, a  copy of the resolution taken under
8subsection (2) together with a  copy of the plans and specifý-
cations prepared and deposited under subsection (3) and
of any objections submitted under subsection (4) for his
consideration.
(6) If the Governor in Council, af ter cangidering any
objection made, approves the plans and specifýcations
submitted and considers it expedient having regard to all
the circumstances that the appropriate authority should be
permitted to construct, reconstruct or improve the street
Ýn question, the Governor in Council may approve such

8 STREETS AND B UILDINGS. [CAP. 96.1~ i
plans and specifýcations absolutely or subject to such
modifýcations or conditions as he may deem fýt and his
decision shall be final and conclusive and no appeal or other
proceedings shalllie therefrom to the Supreme Court or to
any other Court.
(7) When the Governor in Council has grant ed his
approval, notice thereof shall be published in the Gazette
and the plans and specifýcations shall be binding on the
8 appropriate authority and upon all owners affected.
(8) The cost of such construction, reconstruction or
improvement, af ter the deduction of any unexpended sum
of money deposited with the appropriate authority by a
permit holder under the provisions of section 6 of this Law,
shall be borne by the owners of immovable property
abutting on such street, and such cost shall be apportioned
amongst the owners affected according to the frontage of
their respective immovable property which front s  or abuts
the street in question :
Provided that the appropriate authority may reduce the
amount of the cost to be apportioned amongst the owners
affected by such percentage as the Goveroor in Council may
approve :
Provided alsa that no such apportionment of cost shall
be made in respect of any of the following immovable
properties :-
(a) places or buildings belonging to any religious
community consecrated and used exclusively
for public worship ;
(b) cemeteries or burial grounds ;
(c) land registered or recorded as tamýnon pasture
grounds in the books of the District Lands Office;
8 (d) land or open spaces recorded or assigned ab antiquo
for the common use of a  community ;
(e) immovable property belonging to Her Majesty or
to the Government ;
(j) any immovable property held and registered in
the books of the District Lands Office in trust for
elementary schools of any religious com-
munity under the Elementary Education Law Cap. 166.
and for secondary schools under the Secondary Cap. 169.
Education Law, or any other Law amending or
substituted for the same.

16 CAP. 96.]STREETS AND B UILDINGS. 8
-'.
(9) When the work of construction, reconstruction or
improvement has been completed, an exact statement of the
cost shall be published in the Gazette together with a  final
apportionment of the cost between the owners affected or
between the appropriate authority and the owners affected,
as the cage may be. The proportion in such cost and the
annua! instalment on such proportion due by such owners
shall be registered in the books of the District Lands Office
and shall be deemed to be a charge on the immovable
property concerned and a  tax due by such owners and shall
8be collected from each such owner in the manýýer prescribed
Cap. 329. in the Tax Collection Law, and thereafter no such owner shall
selI, transfer, alienate or dispose of any of his immovable
property so affected, unless prior to such sale, transfer,
alienation or disposal, he produces to the District Lands
Office a  receipt from the Tax Collector of payment of all
outstanding amounts due by him on such affected im-
movable property.
Appeals. 18. (1) Any person aggrieved by the refusa! of an
appropriate authority to grant a  permit under the provi-
sions of section 3  of this Law, or by any condition imposed
under section 6  or 9  of this Law may, within ten days from
the date of the communication to him of such refusal or
conclition, as the cage may be, appeal to the Governor in
Council.
(2) Any person who objects to any plans prepared and
deposited under the provisions of section 12 of this Law may,
at any time within which such plans are open to inspection,
appeal to the Governor in Council.
(3) Any person aggrieved by any order of an appropriate
authority made under the provisions of section 15 of this
Law may, within ten days from the date of the communica-
tion to him of such order, appea! to the Governor in Council. 8
60/44/54. (4) The decision of the Governor in Council on an appeal
under this section shall be final and conclusive and no
appeal or other proceeding sha!l lie therefrom to the Supreme
Court or to any other Court.
Regulations. 19. (1) The Governor in Council may make Regulations
to be published in the Gazette for all or any of the following
purposes, that is to say-
(a) the manner in which application for permits may be
made and the terms under which such permits
i

8 i
may be issued and for enabling appropriate
Iauthorities to prescribe forms for the purpose ;
(b) the attachment of special conditions to any permit;
(c) providing for the means of supervision and control
over streets or buildings for which permits have
been grant ed either generally or in respect of
street s  or buildings in a  particular area ;
(d) the minimum dimensions and shape of building
8plots in resp~ct of which permits ma,}:' b~ issued,
the proportýonate area of any buýlding plot
which may be built on and the distance of any
building trom the boundaries oi the building
plot;
(e) the materials for, and manýýer of construction,
repair, or alteration of, or the extemal ap-
pearance, stability, resistance to fire, ventilation,
drainage, sanitatian, and water supply of,
buildings ;
(f) the safety of occupiers, or users of and persons
resorting to, buildings ;
(g) the fees to be paid for any permit grant ed under this
Lawand the manýýer in which such fees are to be
paid ;
(h) any matters necessary for, or incidental to, secur-
ing the observance of the Regulations made
under the provisions of this Law;
(i) generally for the better carrying out of the provi-
sions of this Law.
(2) Any Regulations made under the provisions of sub-
section (1) may be made with respec,t to any particular area
in which an appropriate authority exercises powers under
8 the provisions of this Law.
20. (I) Any person who contravenes- Oflences and
(a) any of the provisions of section 3 or 10 of this IJaw; P
7e~lties.
OJ 44{54.
or
(b) any condition imposed under section 6  or 9  of this
Law; or
(c) any order made under the provisions of sectiön ýs
of this Law; or
(d) any Regulations made under this Law,
':tr

e i
shaI1 be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to a fine not
exceeding fifty polinds.
3 ofý8/ss. (2) When an offence is committed under subsection (1),
each of the following persons shall be deemed to have taken
part in committing the offence and be guilty of the offence
and may be charged and tried with actually committing it
and may be punished accordingly, that is to say :-
(i) every person who actually does the act or makes
..the omission which constitu~es the offence ; 8
(ýý) every person who does or omýts to do any act
for the purpose of enabling or aiding another
person to commit the offence ;
(iii) every person who procures, aids or abets another
person in committing the offence ;
(iv) every person who solicits or incites or endeavours
to persuade another person to commit the
offence ;
(v) every person who does any act preparatory to
the commission of the offence.
(3) In addition to any other penalty prescribed by this
section, the Court, before which a  person is convicted for
any offence under subsection (1), shall order-
(a) that the bui1ding or any part thereof, as the case
may be, in respect of which the offence has been
committed shaI1 be pulled down or removed
within such time as shall be specified in such
order, but in no cage exceeding two months,
unless a  permit is obtained in respect thereof in
the meantime from the appropriate authority :
Provided that such authority may, in granting
such permit, impose such terms and conditions 8
7(a) ofýo/so. as to it may seem fit and the provisions of
section 4  of this Law shall apply to every such
permit ;
(b) the person convicted to pay the costs of the pro-
ceedings and any fees connected with the charge,
which such person ought to have paid and which
he failed or refused or neglected to pay.
(4) if any person against whom an order has been made
under the provisions ot subsection (2) shaI1 fai1 or neglect
..

8 STREETS AND BUILD:lNGS. [CAP. 96. 19 i
to comply with such order within the time specified therein,
it  shall be Iawful for the appropriate authority to carry out
such order and any costs incurred for the carrying out
thereof shall be payabIe to the appropriate authority by the
person against whom the order was made and such costs
shall be deemed to be a  penaIty within the meaning of the
Criminal Procedure Law, and payment thereof shall be Cap. .155.
enforced accordingir.
8(5) Any person against whom an order has been made
under subsection (2) who disobeys or fails to, compir with
such order shall, notwithstanding that the appropriate
authority has proceeded to carry out or has carried out suGh
order, be guilty of an offence and shall be Iiable to imprison-
ment not exceeding three months or to a fine not exceeding
fifty pounds or to both such imprisonment and nne.
(6) All fines recovered in respect of any offence com- 7 (br of lO}50
mitted against this section shall be payabIe to the
appropriate authority concerned.
21. (1) Where a  complaint is made to the Governor that Failure of
an appropriate authorityhas failed to compirwith or to approp.riate
..! authorýty to
ta~e appropnate steps !o enforce, any of the proV.lsýons of comý:ýlywith
this Law or any Regulatýonsmade t.hereunde~ or to prosecute lao;ý:~;s of
any offender for any contraventýon of thýs Law or any Regulations.
Regulations made thereunder, the Governor, if  satisfied that 8 of 10{50.
the authority has been guilty of the alleged faiIure and that
it  would be in the public interest so to proceed, shall make
an Order limiting a  time for the performance of the matter
of such complaint and, if  the failure is not remedied by the
appropriate authority by the time limited in the Order, the
Governor may appoint a person or a board of not more than
three persons to remedy the failure and all costs and
expenses conIiected with, or incidental to, the purpose or
8purposes in respect of which the appointment is  made shall
be paid by the appropriate authority in default or by any
individual members of such authority who, in the opinion
of the Governor, were responsible for the fai1ure, whether
such members are still holding office or not.
(2) When the costs and expenses payabIe under sub-
section (1) are ascertained, the Governor may issue a
certificate in respect thereof and, upon fýling a  copy of such
certificate with the Registrar of the District Court of the
district within which the property is situated, the certificate
shall be enforced as if it  were an order of the Court.

20 CAP. 96.] STREETS AND B UILDINGS. 8
Special 22. (1) Where a  complaint is made to the Governorthat,
~~~~r in by reason of the failures of an appropriate authority to
certain cases. comply with or enforce the provisions of this Law or any
8 of lO/50. Regulations in force for the time being, there have been
erected in any part of any area within which such authority
operates any buildings which do not comply with the
provisions of this Law or of such Regulations, the Governor,
if satisfied that it would be in the public interest so to
proceed, shall make an Order limiting a  time for the per-
formance of the matter of such comp.laint and, if  the failure
8is not remedied by the appropriate authority by the time
limited in the Order, the Governor may appoint a  board of
not more than three persons to enquire into, and make
report to him regarding, the matter.
(2) A board appointed under the provisions of sub-
section (1) sha.11 have power-
(a) to procure all such evidence, written or oral, and to
examine all such persons as witnesses as it  may
think. necessary or desiralýle to procure or
examýne ;
(b) to summon any person residing in the Colony to
attend any meeting of the board to give evidence
or produce anY document in his possession and
to examine him as a  witness or to produce any
document in his possession, subject to all just
exceptions, and to fine in a  sum not exceeding
five pounds any person who, having been
summoned by the board as aforesaid, fails to
comply with the requirements of the summons
and does not excuse such failure to the satisfac-
tion of the board.
(3) Upon receipt of the report, the Governor may make
iuoh Order as he ma y deem necessary in order to remed y the
fai1ures of the appropriate authori~y in the p~rt .of the area
8affected by the report and, wýthout pre]udýce to the
generality of the foregoing powers, every such Order may
provide-
(a) that a1.1 or any bui1dings in such part which do not
comply with the provisions of this Law or the
Regulations shall, notwithstanding that a permit
has been issued under section 20 (2) (a) of this
Law, be pulled down or removed by the board ;
(b) that the costs of the pulling down or removal
sha.11 be paid by the person who has erected the

8 ; STREET S AND B UILDINGS. [CAP. 96,- ~ i
,  " buiýdÝrlg or by the appropriate authority in
default or by any individual members of such
authority who, in the opinion ot the Govemor,
were responsible for the failure, whether such
members are still holding office or not;
(c) that the defaulting authority or individual mem-
bers thereof shall pay to the holder of a  permit
issued under section 20 (2) (a) of this Law such
compensation for the pulling down or removal
8 of his buildÝýýg, as may be contained in the
order,
(4) When any costs and any compensation payable under
subsection (3) are ascertained, the Govemor may issue a
certificate in respect thereof and, upon filing a  copy of such
certificate with th~ Registrar of the District Court of the
district within which the property is situated, the certificate
shall be enforced against the authority or persons therein
mentioned as if  it  were an order of the Court.
23. Whenever a person or board is appointed by the Suspension
Govemor under the provisions of section 21 or 22 of this ~~~~~~~~ef
Law, such person or board shall be invested with all powers authority.
of an appropriate authority as may be necessary for the 8 of lO/50.
purpose or purposes of the appointment and until such
purpose or purposes is or are completed, the powers of the.
appropriate authority affected shall, as regards such
purpose or purposes, be suspended,
24. Nothing in this Law shall affect the operation of Permits
,
11fhA."LfLd ' under
sectýon o t   e ntýquýtýes aw or o any awamen mg Antiquities
or substituted for the same, and no permit issued under this Law.
Law shall be operative unless and until a  permit under the Cap. 3l.
said section of the said Law is obtained.
8 25. Nothing in this Law shall apply to the Govemment Government
fGto be
or to any department o the overomeýýt. exempted.
26. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Law contained, Spec~a~
h'h.
fthft ' provýsýon
t   e  appropnate aut onty, or e  purpose o gran mg any with regard
permit or any certificate of approval under this Law, to Service
relating to any land belonging to a Service Department shall ~:~~:~-
be the Director of Planning and Housing : 4  of l8/55.
Provided that the Director of Planning and Housing,
before granting any permit under this section, shall, if he

-22,~4:fc CAP. 96]STREETS AND B UILDINGS. 18 i
,
i" considers it appropriate, consult the municipal council of
the municipal corporation within the area in which such
land is situated.
(2) The Director of Planning and Housing in exercise of
his powers under this section may, where ýn his opinion
owing to the nature of the intended work such a  course is
desirable, dispense with any permit or certificate of approval
under this section.
(3) The provisions of section 11 of this Law shall not 8
apply to any street laid out or constructed by a  Service
Department by virtue of any permit grant ed by the Director
ot Planning and Housing, under the provisions of this
section, and any such street, unless the Govemor otherwise
directs, shall not be deemed a public street and the expenses
of repairing and maintaining any such street shall be bome
by the Service Department concemed.
(4) A Service Department, other than a Civil Department,
shall be exempted from the payment of any fees under the
provisions of this Law, or of any Regulations made there-
under.
(5) For the purpose of this section-
II land belonging to a Service Department "  means any
immovable property which is registered in the
nameo! a Service Department or any immovable
property which is owned, held or enjoyed by the
Goyemment and which has been made available
to a Service Department by a  lease from, or
under some other arrangement with, the Govem-
ment, but does not ýncIlide any immovable
property, leased or otherwise occupied by a
Service Department which is not registered in
its name, or, which is not owned, held or
enjoyed by the Govemment, except such pro- 8
perty which is leased or occupied by a Service
Department for the purpose of erecting a
temporary camp thereon or for any other
temporary purpose which the Service Depart-
ment satisfies the Govemor is of such a  nature
that, in the public interest, the provisions of this
section should operate:
Provided that any temporary camp or build-
ing erected for any temporary purpose on an y
immovable property leased or occupied by a
;;", ,-

8 -STREET S AND B UILDINGS. [GAP. 96 23 i
Service Department for a temporary purpose
shall be removed by such Department when
no more required or when such, purpose is
served, unless a permit is obtaÝned in respect
thereof by the owner of such immovable pro-'
perty from the proper appropriate authority ;
"  Service Department "  means Her Majesty's
Naval, Military or Air Force Authorities, and
includes any Department of Her Majesty's
8 Government in the United Kingdom (Ýn this
section referred to as a "  Civil Department "),
but does not ÝncIlide the Navy, Army or Air
Force Institutes or any similar or benevolent
navaý, military or air force Ýnstitutions.
27. (a) Any permit lawfully granted and any order Saving.
lawfully made under any of the Laws repealed by this
Law* and subsisting on the date of the coming into opera-
tion of this Law shaýý be valid and effective and shall be
deemed to be a permit granted or order made under the
provisions of this Law;
(b) any plans lawfully made by any municipaI corpora-
tion under the provisions of section 136 of the Municipal
Corporation Laws, 1930 to 1945, and in force on the date of
the coming into operation of this Law, shall be valid and
effective and shall be deemed to have been made under the
provisions of this Law;
.The following enactments were repealed by this Law ;-
.; )
Law Exteni of ,.epeaý
The Construction of Buildings, Streets
and Wells on Arazi Mirie Laws, 1927
8to 1938... The whole.
The Construction of Buildings, Streets
and Wells on Arazi Mirie (Special
Provisions) Law, 1938 The whole.
The Municipal Corporations Laws, 1930
to 1945 (a) section 115 (1), paragraph (e) ;
(b) sections 131 to 136, both inclusive ;
(c) sections 138 to 145, both inclusive ;
(d) section 199 (1), paragraph (d).
The Summer Resorts (Development)
Law, 1938 (a) section 24 (1) paragraph (i), except
in so far as it  relates to tents ;
(b) section 24 (1) paragraph (u), the
words" and control the construc-
tion or alteration of any street ,. ;
(c) sections 39 to 43, both inclusive.

24 ! GAP. 96} STREETSAND'B~ILDINGS. G i
(c) any speciallist lawfully made by a municipal council,
Iunder the provisions of section 138 of the Municipal Corpora- i
tions Laws, 1930 to 1945, and in force on the date of the
coming into operation of this Law, shall be valid and
effective as if  this Law had not been enacted ;
(d) any public instrument made under any of the Laws or
sections of the Laws repealed by this Law* dealing with
matters in respect of which Regulations are made under the
provisions of this Law or which are inconsistent with any
8such Regulations, shall, upon the making of such Regula-
tions, be cancelled.
,., "'." "~; ,
" ;, , .s~ footnote previous page. .,
8