

8 CAP. 100. i
TYPRUS
8
TREE PLANTINC (VILLACE AREAS)
CHAPTER 100 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
.
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.I.
(Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws withi1l t~e meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.)
1959

~__~AP. 100.] TREE PLANTING{VILLAGE AR Ýra i
i
i
CHAPTER ýoo.
TREE PLANTING (VILLAGE AREAS).
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Seetian Page
1 Short title 2
Ý-2 Interpretation 2
3 Meeting of owners in the viIIage 3
4 List of voters 3
5 Claims for rectification of List of Voters 3
6 Consideration of claims by mukhtar 4
7 Objections to decisions of mukhtar 4
8 Revision of List of Voters by Commissioner 4
9 Noticeof meeting 4
10 Proceedings at meeting 5
11 Report of mukhtar 5
12 Declaration of Tree Planting Area by Commissioner 5
13 Provision when there is  more than one mukhtar 6
14 Power to CommÝssioner 6
15 Offences and penalties 6
16 Power to Governor to make Regulations 7
17 Establishment of viIIage fund 7
18 Limitation as to construction of Law... 7
19 Saving 8
20 Extens;on of expired period 8
-
A LAW TO AMEND AND CONSOLIDATE THE LAWS RELATING
TO THE RESERVATION OF TREE PLANTING AREAS IN
1949 VILLAGES.
Cap.175. [22nd january, 1948.]
56 oj 55.
Short title. l. This Law may be cited as the Tree Planting (Village
Areas) Law.
Int.erpre. 2. (1) In this Law-
tatýon.
cc animal" means any bull, cow, ox, heifer, calf,
camel, horse, mule, donkey, sheep, goat or swine ;
Ý-cc Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the
district in which the area proposed to be reserved as a
Tree Planting Area is situate ;
cc mukhtar" means the mukhta, of the village in
which the area proposed to be reserved as a Tree
Planting Area is situate ;
cc owner in the village" means any person of over
eighteen years of age who, whether being an inhabitant
of the village or not, is the proprietor or possessor of
not less than ten donums of land situated within the

TREE PLANTING (VILLAGE AREAS). [CAP.l00. 3 i
8 limits of the village whether such land is or is not
registered in the name of such person in the books of
the District Lands Office;
tt Tree Planting Area "  means the area or areas in
any village declared, under the provisions of this Law,
to be reserved as the Tree Planting Area of the village.
(2) Any notice required to be post ed up under the
provisions of this Law sha1l be posted at every church and
mosque in the village affected thereby or in such con-
a spicuous place or places in the village affected thereby as
.the Commissioner may direct, and the certifýcate of the
Commissioner that such notice has been so post ed shall be
conclusive evidence of such posting.
3. The Commissioner may, whenever he thinks it Meeting. of
advisable, and Sh.all, UPo? a  requisition signed by not less ~::~~~:e.
than ten owners ýn the výllage, serve or cause to be served
upon the mukhtar a  notice in writing calling uPQn him to
convene a meeting of the owners in the village for the
purposes specifýed in section 10 of this Law.
4. Within fourteen days of the receipt of a notice in List of
writing as in section 3  of this Law provided, the mukhtar voters.
shall-
(a) prepare or cause to be prepared a list of voters
(hereinatter referred to as the tt List of Voters ")
showing therein the name and surname and
place of residence of every owner in the village :
Provided that the names and surnames and
place of residence of the Christian and Moslem
owners in the village sha1l be shown therein in
the Greek and Turkish languages respectively,
as the case may be ;
(b) sign the List of Voters and post up, or cause to be
posted up, signed copies of the List of Voters ;
8 (c) forward to the Commissioner a  copy of the List of
Voters, such copy to be signed and sealed by the
mukhtar.
5. Any owner in the village who is not included in the Claims for
L.
fVdh1.b.1 d  dth.
drectification
ýst o oters an w o  c aýms to e  ýnc u e ereýn an of List of
any owner in the yillage who objects to the inclusian of a  Voters.
person in the List of Voters, shall deposit his claim or
objection, duly signed by him, with the mukhtar within
seven days of the posting of the List of Voters as in section 4
of this Law provided.

4 GAP. 100.] TREE PLANTING (VILLAGE AREAS). :::)
t~onsidferýa~ 6. Within seven days of the expiration of the period
ýon o c aýms .
b d..5f   h.
Lhkhhallby mukhtar. prescrý e ýn sectýon o t   LS aw, t  e mu tar S -
(a) consider and decide upon any cJaim or objection
duly made ;
(b) notify his decision in writing to any person affected
by such decision ;
(c) make such alterations in the List of Voters as he
may think necessary in consequence of any such
decision as atoresaid; and
(d) notif)! ~uch alterations in writing to the Com-
8mýssýoner.
?bjec!i?ns 7. Any person affected by any decision given by the
~~ ~~l~t~~. mukhtar may object to such decision by depositing in
writing his objection, duly signed by him, at the office of the
Commissioner within seven days of the notifýcation to
him of such decision.
R.evision of 8. (1) The Commissioner, having considered the objec-
~~:e~:bY tions, shall make such alterations in the List of Voters
~mmis- as he ma y think necessary or shall confýrýn the List of
sýoner. Voters and shall cause a  copy thereof, as fýnally altered or
confýrmed, to be served upon the mukhtar and to be
post ed up forthwith.
(2) The List of Voters so altered or confýrmed by the
Commissioner shall be fýnal and conclusive for all the
purposes of this Law:
Provided that, if no claÝms for rectifýcation have been
deposited with the mukhtar of the village as in section 5  of
this Law provided, the List of Voters prepared and posted
by the mukhtar of the village under the provisions of
section 4  of this Law shall, on the expiration of the period
thereinprescribed, be deemed to be fýnal and conclusive for
all the purposes of this Law. 8
Notice of 9. (1) The mukhtar shall, within one month from the date
meetingo on which the List of Voters has become or shall be deemed
to have become final and conclusive, post up or cause to be
post ed up a notice, duly signed and sealed by him, convening
a  meeting for the purposes of this' Lawand specifying in
such notice the date, place and time for the meeting.
(2) Copy of the notice post ed as aforesaid, duly signed and
sealed by the mukhtar, shall be forwarded forthwith by him
to the Commissioner.

e TREE PLANTING (VILLAGE AREAS). [CAP. 100. ~
10. (l) Every meeting so convened shall be held under the Procee~ings
presidency of the mukhtar on the date and at the place and at meetýngs.
time appointed as in section 9  of this Law provided and
business may be transacted thereat if  not less than one-third
of the owners in the village whose names appear in the List
of Voters are actually present :
Provided that the mukhtJar may adjourn the meeting for
seven days if at least one-third of such owners are not
actually present and at every such adjourned meeting any
8num~er of such owners as may be actually present shall
constýtute a quorum.
(2) Every owner in the village whose name appears in the
List of Voters and who is actually present at the meeting
shall be entitled to vote on all questions or resolutions
proposed at every such meeting.
(3) All questions and resolutions proposed at every such
meeting shall be determined in open voting by a  majority
of not less than the two-thirds of the owners in the village
present thereat and entitled to vote.
(4) Every such meeting shall determine whether an area
shall be reserved as the Tree Planting Area of the village and
shall fix and describe with boundaries and particulars the.
area so reserved :
Provided that-
(a) such area shall not comprise in the aggregate
more than one quarter of the total extent of the
lands situated within the limits of the village ;
and
(b) no place in the built-up part of the village or within
a distance of four hundred yards therefrom shall
be comprised in such area.
11. Whenever at any meeting convened and held as in Report of
8 section ýo of this Law provided it is determined that an mukhtar.
area is to be reserved as the Tree Planting Area of the village,
the mukhtar shall forward forthwith to the Commissioner
areport signed and sealed by him, containing a  description
of the area in question with boundaries and particulars and
stating whether such area fulfils the conditions prescribed
in section ýo (4) of this Law.
12. (l) if  the Commissioner approves the report submitted Declaration
d.dOtdOh.dIIh.of Tree
an consý ers ý  expe ýent, avýng regar to a t  e cýrcum- Planting
stances, that the area described in such report should be Area b.y
Commýs-
þioner.

18
reserved as the Tree Planting Area of the village concemed,
he shal1 by order declare it to be reserved as the Tree
Planting Area of the village :
Provided that if  the Commissioner is of opinion that the
'"' area degeribed in the report does not fulfiI the conditions
prescribed in section 10 (4) of this Law, he may so amend the
particulars thereof as to make it  fulfýl those conditions.
(2) Every such order shall be published in the Gazette
and shall comeinto force af ter the expiration of one month
from ~he date of its publication and shall remain in force for 8
a penod of ten years thereafter :
Provided that the Commissioner may, on good cause
shown, by order to be published in the Gazette abridge the
said period of ten years or extend the said period of ten years
for a  further period not exceeding ten years.
(3) As soon as possible af ter its publication in the Gazette,
the Commissioner shall cause to be post ed up a copy of every
such order in the Greek or Turkish language or in both
languages as the cage may be.
Provision
13Wh.
villth'hkhwhen there .en ýn any age ere ýs more t   an one mu tar,
is more than the mukhtar of the community in numerical majority in the
::khtar. village shall be the mukhtar who shall perform the duties or
do the acts imposed upon mukhtars by this Law.
~wer .to 14. When the mukhtar is  unable or unwilling or neglects
sio~eý:1s- or refuses to pertorm anyot the duties or do any of the acts
imposed upon mukhtars by this Law, the Commissioner may
appoint a fýt person to perform the said duties or do the said
acts, and the duties and acts performed or done under this
Law by the person so appointed shall be valid and effective
as if  performed or done by the mukhtar.
o~nces 15. (1) (a) Subject to the provisions of section ýs of this
8~~nalties. Law if, af ter the commencement of any plantation on any
land in any Tree Planting Area, any animal is found in or
upon any such area, both the owner of such animal and the
person, it  any, in whose charge it  was at the time shall be
guilty of an offerice under this Law;
(b) any mukhtar or otherperson appointed as in section 14
of this Law provided, who shall reflise or neglect without
reasonable excuse to perform any duty or do any act to be
performed or done by him under this Law, or who shall
knowingly make to the Çommissioner any report false in

8 TREE PLANTING (VILLAGE AREAS). [GAP. 100._- -' i
any materlal particular, shall be guilty of an offence under
this Law;
(c) any person who-
(i) prevents or obstructs any mukhtar or other person
appointed as in section 14 of this Law provided
to perform any duty or do any act to be
performed or done by him under this Law; or
(ii) acts in contravention of any Regulations made
under this Law,
8 shall be guilty of an offence under this Law.
(2) Any person who is  guilty of an offence under this Law
~ shall be liable to imprisonment not exceeding one month or
to a fine not exceeding ten pounds or to both such imprison-
-ment and fine :
Provided that, in the cage of an offence under paragraph
(a) of subsection (1) of this section, the offender shall, in
addition, be adjudged to pay the sum of one shilling for
every animal in respect of which the offence has been
committed.
16; The Governor may make Regulations to be published Power to
in the Gazette- Governor
to make
(a) prescribing the forms to be used in connection with Regulations.
any act to be done under this Law;
(b) generally for the better carrying into effect of the
purposes of this Law. .
17. The Commissioner may by notification under his Establish-
hand- ment of
viIIage fund.
(a) establish for any viIIage a fund into which all fines
recovered under this Law for offences committed
in the Tree Planting Area of such viIIage shall be
paid;
8 (b) prescribe the object for which and the mode in
which any fines recovered under this Law shall
be utilized or expended.
18. Nothing in this Law contained shall- Limitations
(a) affect the provisions of the Rural Constables Law, ~~:~truction
or any Law amending or substituted for the of Law.
same .Cap. 287.
,
(b) prevent any person from taking any animal along
a  passage situated in or passing through any
Tree Planting Area, provided that such animal

Si GAP. 100.] TREE PLANTING (VILLAGE AREAS). 8
is being taken from and to places outside a Tree
Planting Area and provided that the journey is
prosecuted with all reasonable speed ;
(c) prevent any person from taking in or upon or along
a  Tree Planting Area or any threshing floor
situated within any such area any animal, other
than sheep, goat or swine, as may be absolutely
necessary for the cultivation or improvement
of any immovable property situated within
any such area or for the transport of any produce 8
grown in any such area or as may be absolutely
necessary in connection with any such threshing
floor ;
(d) impose any obligation on any person to plant trees
or to cause trees to be planted in any Tree
Planting Area ;
(e) prevent a prosecution under any other Law, but
so that a  person shall not be punished twice for
the same offence ;
2 of 56/55 (f) prevent any person from grazing on his own lands
within any Tree Planting Area, any camel, horse,
mare, bu1l, cow, ass or mule or the young of
such animals :
Provided that such animals and their young
are at all times tethered in such manýýer as to
.prevent damage to any tree :
Provided further that the Village Commission
of the village concerned may at any time, having
regard to the age of the trees, the area of the
lands aforesaid, the conduct of any such person,
and having regard to all material considerations,
prorubit, limit or control such grazing in such
manýýer as the Village Commission may deem fýt.
Saving. 19. Every Tree Planting Area reserved as such under the 8
provisions of the Tree Planting Village Areas Laws, 1930 to
1936, and all Regulations made and every notifýcation
published or fund established thereunder shall be deemed to
have been reserved, made, published and established under
the provisions of this Law.
Extension 20. As respects any order reserving a Tree Planting Area
of ý:xpired in any village, the initial period whereof had been extended
period. for a  further period of fýve years under the Laws repealed

8 TREE PLANTING (~:~E AREAS). [CAP.I00.9 i
by this Law,* the Commissioner may, by order to be
published in the Gazette, extend such further period for
another period of fýve years from the expiration thereof
notwithstanding that such further fýrst period of fýve years
as aforementioned had in the meantime expired :
Provided that no person shall be prosecuted for any
offence committed under any of the Laws repealed by this
Law* in any Tree Planting Area between the date ot the
expiration of the fýrst period of fýve years and the date of
8 publication of the order of extension as aforementioned.
*  The Tree Planting (VilIage Areas) Laws, 1930 to 1936, were repealed by this Law.
8