

8
CAP. 101.
CYPRUS
8 ~
"
...{.-,. ,.
I. .,\ ~r: '.;~:,,:(:,..,
USUIY (FAIMEIS)
,"" ,; ý:'t,: '.
CHAPTER 101 OF THE LAWS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED] BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by tke Government of Cyprus tke Government Printers of this Edition
.of Laws witkin tke meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959

8
CHAPTER lOt.
USURY (FARMERS).
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title 0 .0. 2
Ý-2 Interpretation o.. 0 2
3 Compound interest .00 .00 .00 00. 2
4 Remedy for excessive interest ...o.. o.. 2
FoR THE PREVENTION OF USURY.
1949
Cap.1780 [29th A
pril 1919.]
25 of 57 '
Short title. l. This Law may be cited as the Usury (Farrners) Law.
Int.erpre- 2. in this Law-
,  tation.
tt farrner "  includes fmit grower and grazier ;
tt interest "  Ýncludes money paid by way of interest
and any sum charged for expenses, inquiries, fýnes,
banýýs, premium or renewals, or any other charge or
payment made whether in cash or in kind in respect
of any loan.
~ompound 3. No interest shall become payable on interest due on
ýnteresto any loan to a  farmer unill one year af ter such interest has
become due.
Reme~y for 4. Where proceedings are taken in any Court by alender
excessýve
f1ddfinterest. for the recovery o any money ent or avance to a arrner,
or for the enforcement of any agreement or security in
Ý-respect of money lent or advanced, and there is evidence
which satisfýes the Court that the interest charged in respect
of the sum actually lent or advanced is excessive, or that the
amounts charged for expenses, inquiries, fýnes, banýýs,
premium, renewals or any other charges, are excessive or
that the transaction is  in any respect harsh and unconscion-
able, the Court may re-ap en the transaction and take an
account between the lender and the farmer and may, not-
withstanding any account stated, or bond, mortgage, or
any agreement purporting to create an obligation, relieve
the farrner of payment of any sum in excess of the sum

8 -USURY (FARMERS). [CAP.I0l.,
adjudged by the Court to be fairif due, and if  any excess '
over such sum has been paid or allowed on account by the
farmer, may order the lender to repay it, and may set asÝrle,
or revise, or alter, any security given or agreement made in
respect of money lent or advanced by the lender, and if  the
lender has part ed with the security may order him to
indemnify the farmer in respect thereof. Any Court in
which proceedings might be taken for the recovery of money
lent or advanced by a  lender to a  farmer sha1l have, and
may at the instance of the farmer exercise, like powers as
8 may be exercised under this section where proceedings are
taken by the lender for the recovery of the money lent or
advanced, and the Court shall have power, notwithstanding -
any agreement to the contrary, to entertain an application
by the farmer notwithstanding that the time for repayment
of the money lent or advanced may not have arrived.
i
8
c. m2