

18 CAP. 102..
TYPRUS
8
VECET ABLE AND FLOWER PRODUCTION
CHAPTER 102. OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV, LONDON, W.1.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959
m2 (2)

o
CHAPTER 102.
VEGETABLE AND~FLOWER SEED
PRODUCTION.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
ý Short title 2 8
2 Interpretation 2
3 Declaration of scheduled areas and prescribed crops 2
4 Prohibition of seed growing in scheduled areas save under licence ...3
5 Power of entry 3
6 Power to Director to give directions preventing cross-fertilization of
prescribed crop 3
7 Offences and penalties 3
A LAW TO REGULATE THE CULTIVATION OF VEGETABLES
AND FLOWERS FOR SEED.
~:ý79. [20th November, 1947.J
Short title. 1. This Law may be cit~d as the Vegetable and Flower
Seed Production Law.
Interpre- 2. In this Law-
tation. "  Director" means the Director of Agriculture and
includes any person appointed by him in writing for
the purposes of this Law;
"grower" means a grower of any prescribed crop
within a scheduled area and includes any person in
whom the property in a  prescribed crop is vested before
the harvesting thereof ;
"prescribed crop" means any plants or class of
plants, including weeds, declared to be a prescribed
8crop under the provisions of paragraph (b) of section 3 ;
"  scheduled area " means any area declared to be a
scheduled area under the provisions of paragraph (a)
of section 3.
Declaration 3. The Governor may, by notice in the Gazette-
~:::::~~led (a) declare any area to be a scheduled area for the
prescribed purposes of this Law;
crops. .
(b) declare any plant or class of plants, ýncluding
weeds, to be a prescribed crop for the purposes

e Vegetable and Flower Seed Production, [CAP. 102: 3
of this Lawand any such declaration may apply ,
generalir to ali scheduled areas or only to such
scheduled areas as may be specifýed in the notice.
4. Save under a licence in writing from the Director fýrst Prohibition
obtained and in accordance with such conditions as may be ~;;:'~~g in
prescribed therein, no person shali grow for seed, or permit scheduled
to flo~er, within any scheduled area any prescribed crop a::::rsave
applyýng to such area. licence,
8 5. The Director mav, at any time during the hours of Power of
daylight, enter upon aÝýy tand in any scheduled area for the entry.
purpose of ascertaining whether the requirements of this'
Law have been or are being complied with. -
6. (1) Where it  is found that any grower has contravened P?wer to
th'f'4f   hiLhdDýrector e requýrements o sectýon o t s aw or as contravene to give
or failed to comply with any conditions in any licence directio~s
,
dthdhD,t'h.dipreventIng
ýssue ereun er, t e ýrec or may, wýt out pre]u ce to cross-
any proceedings under section 7  of this Law, require such fertilizat~on-
bt' , , ,k.
hi.fýdof prescrýbed
grower y no ýce ýn wrýtýng to ta e, wýt n a specý e crop.
period not being less than three days from the date of the
service of the notice, such steps as the Director may direct
so as to render the crop in respect of which the contravention
or failure has been committed incapable of cross-fertilizing
any prescribed crop, without payment to the grower of
any compensation in respect of any such action as he may
be required to take in accordance with the provisions of
this section,
(2) In the event of any' grower failing to comply with any
directions given under subsection (1) of this section, the
Director may, without prejudice to any proceedings under
section 7  of this Law, enter upon the tand of such grower
and take such action and do suc~ things as may be necessary
8 to ensure compliance with the directions without payment
to the grower of any compensation in respect of any act
taken or thing done in connection therewith; and the
Director shall be entitled to recover from the grower any
cost and any expenses in connection with any such action
or thing,
7. Any person who- Offences
(a) contravenes any of the provisions of this Law ; ~~~alties.
(b) contravenes or fails to comply with any condition in
any licenç~ issued under the provisions of

4 GAP. 102.] Vegetabu and Flower Seed Production. O
section4 of this Law or with any direction given
under section 6  of this Law;
(c) obstructs or in any way hinders the Director in
carrying out any of the provisions of this Law
or exercising any of the powers vested in him
under this Law,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to imprison-
ment not exceeding three months or to a fýne not exceeding
twenty-fýve pounds or to both.
8
8