

8 CAP. 7. i
CYPiUS
8
CIVIL PROCEDURE (RECIPROCAl
ENFORCEMENT OF JUDCMENTS)
CHAPTER 7 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government P,.inte,.s of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statules) Act, 1907.]
1959

8 i
CHAPTER 7.
CIVIL PROCEDURE (RECIPROCAL ENFORCEMENT
OF JUDGMENTS). '
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
8Sution Page 1 Short title 0'0 000 00' '0' 1
2 Interpretation 00 1
3 Enforcement in Cyprus of judgments obtained in superior Conrts
in the United Kingdom 0'0 2
4 Issue of certificates of judgments obtained in Cyprus .o o 3
5 Power to make Rules of Court 3
6 Application of this Law 000 3
PROVIDING FOR THE RECIPROCAL ENFORCEMENT OF J UDG-
MENTS IN CYPRUS AND IN OTHER PARTS OF HER
MAJESTY'S DOMINIONS.
[13th june, 1921.] 1949 Cap. 8.
1. This Law may be cited as the Civil Procedure Short title.
(Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments) Law.
2. (1) In this Law- Interpreta-
ýý judgment "  means any judgment or order given or tiono
made by a Coýýrt in any civil proceedings, whether
before or af ter the passing of this Law, whereby any
sum of money is made payable, and includ~s an
award in proceedings on an arbitration if  the award has,
in pursuance of the law in force in the place where it
was made, become enforceable in the same manýýer as a
judgment given by a  Coýýrt in that place ;
a ýý judgment creditor" means the person by whom
., the j'udgment was obtained, and includes the successors
and assigns of that person;
ýý judgment debtor "  means the person against whom
the judgment was given, and includes any person
against whom the judgment is enforceable in the place
where it  was given ;
ýý anginal Court "  in relation to any judgment means
the Court by which the judgment was given ;
(ý registering Court" in relation to any judgment
means the Court by:which the judgment was registered.

rO
(2) Subject to Rules of Court, any of the powers conferred
by this Law on any Court may be exercised by a  judge of
the Court.
~nforceýnent 3. (1) Where a  judgment has been obtained in a  superior
ýnCyprusof
C.hU.
d..dijudg~ent~ ourt ýn t   e nýte Kýngdom, the ]udgment cre tor may
~~;:~~: ýn apply to the District Court, at any time within twelve
Coý;ýrts in the months af ter the date of the judgment, or such longer
~f~~d~m period as may be al1owed by the Court, to have the judgment
.registered in the Court. and on any such application the
8Court may, if  in all the circumstances of the cage they think
it is just and convenient that the judgment should be
enforced in Cyprus, and subject to the provisions of this
section, order the judgment to be registered accordingly.
(2) N o  judgment shal1 be ordered to be registered under
this section if-
(a) the original Court acted without jurisdiction ;  or
(b) the judgment debior, being a person who was
neither carrying on business nor ordinarily
resident within the jurisdiction of the origina!
Court, did not voluntary appear or otherwise
submit or agree to submit to the jurisdiction of
that Court; or
(c) the judgment debior, being the defendant in the
proceedings, was not duly served with the
process of the original Court and did not appear,
notwithstandin.ýz that he was ordinarily resident
or was carrying on business within the jurisdic-
tion of that Court or agreed to submit to the
jurisdiction of that Court ;   or
(d) the judgment was obtained by fraud ;  or
(e) the judgment debtor satisfies the registering Court
either that an appea! is pending, or that he is
entitled and intends to appeal, against the
8judgment ;  or
(i) the judgment was in respect of a  cause of action
which for reasons of public policy or for some
other similar reason could not have been
entertained by the registering Court.
(3) Where a  judgment is registered under this section-
(a) the judgment shal1, as from the date of registration,
be of the same force and effect, and proceedings
may be taken thereon! as if it had been a
~

8 i
judgment originally obtained or entered up on
the date of registration in the registering Court ;
(b) the registering Court shall have the same control
and jurisdiction over the judgment as it  has over
similar judgments given by itself, but in so far
only as relates to execution under this section ;
(C) the reasonable costs of and incidental to the
registration of the judgment (including the costs
of obtaining a  certifýed copy thereof from the
8°.rÝginal Court and of the applic~tion for registr8;-
týon) shall be recoverable ýn Iýke manýýer as ýf
they were sums payable under the judgment.
(4) Rules of Court shall provide-
(4) for service on the judgment debtor of notice of the
registration of a  judgment under this section ;
and
(b) for enabling the registering Court on an application
by the judgment debtor to set aside the registra-
tion of a  judgment under this section on such
terms as the Court thinks fýt ;  and
(c) for suspending the execution of a judgment
registered under this section until the exriration
of the period during which the judgment debtor
may apply to have the reglstration set aside.
(5) In any action brought in any Court in Cyprus on any
judgment which might be ordered to be registered under this
section, the plaintiff shall not be entitled to recqver any
costs of the action unless an application to register the
judgment under this section has previously been refused or
unless the Court otherwise orders.
4. Where a  judgment has been obtained in the District Issueofcerti-
Court against any person, the Court shall, on an application f~~;:e~ts
8mad~ by the. judgment credi!or issue to the judgment ~bta:::d in
creditor a certýfýed copy of the ]udgment. yp .
5. The Governor with the advice and assistance of the Power to
Chief justice may by writing under the hand and offýcial seal ~a~~u~~les
of the Governor and the hand of the Chief j ustice make
Rules of Court for regulating the practice and procedure
(including scales of fees and evidence), in respect of proceed-
ings of any kind under this Law.
6. (1) Where the Governor is satisfýed that reciprocal Appl~cation
..
hbdb1.of this Law
provlSýons ave een ma e y the egýslature of any part of .
~

8 i
Her Majesty's dominiofis outside the United Kingdom for
the enforcement within that part of Her Majesty's dominiofis
of judgments obtained in the DistrictCourt, the Goveroor in
Council may by order declare that this Law shall extend to
judgments obtained in a  superior Court in that part of Her
Majesty's dominiofis in the Iike manýýer as it extends to
judgments obtained in a superior Court in the United
Kingdom, and on any such order being made this Law shall
extend accordingIy.
(2) For the purpose of this section the expression II part
8of Her Majesty's dominiofis outside the United Kingdom "
shall be deemed to incIude any territory which is  under Her
Majesty's protection or in respect of which a  mandate is
being exercised by the Goveroment of any part of Her
Majesty's dominiofis.
(3) An order under this section may be varied or revoked
by a  subsequent order.
, c,; ..
J
.; J !."
8
:;
.-