

8 CAP. 9.
CYPRUS
8
EVIDENCE
CHAPTER 9 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Govemment of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959
-

8 EV/DENGE. [CAP. 9.- 1
CHAPTER 9.
EVIDENCE.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Semon Page
1 Short title 1
82 Interpretation 1
3 Application of English lawand rules of evidence 2
4 Admissibility of documentary evidence as to facts in issue ...2
5 Weight to be attached to evidence 4
6 Evidence in actions for treach of promise 4
7 Claim upon estate of deceased person 4
8 Evidence in case of treason and misprision of treason... ...4
9 Unswom evidence of child of tender years 4
10 Particulars of immediate complaint may be given in evidence on
behalf of the prosecution 4
11 Statements in depositions afterwards contradicted may be con-
sidered in evidence in certain cases 5
12 Reports and certificates admissible in evidence in certain circumstances 5
13 Who are competent witnesses 6
14 Husband and wife 6
15 Presumptions as to documents twenty years old 7
16 Proof of instruments to validity of which attestation is necessary ...7
17 Admission in evidence of documents executed out of the Colony ...7
18 Certified copies of registers, etc., to be evidence 8
SCHEDULE 9
-
A LAW TO AMEND AND CONSOLIDATE CERTAIN PROVISIONS ~~~CaP.15.
RELATING TO THE LAW OF EVIDENCE. 6 O;5~~.
[Stk August, 1946.]
ý. This Law may be cited as the Evidence Law. * Short title.
2. In this Law, I~terpreta-
"  civil proceeding" and cognate expressions meanþ tion.
any proceeding other than a criminal proceeding and
includes arbitrations and references;
8 "  Court" means a Court of competent jurisdiction
and, in relation to arbitrations or references, shal1 be
construed accordingly;
"criminal proceeding" and cognate expressions
means any proceeding against any person to obtain
punishment of such person for any offence against any
Law or public instrument;
"   document "  includes books, maps, plans, drawings,
photographs and also includes any matter. expressed
.And see Stamp Law, Cap. 328, sections 20 and 21.

2 ,CAP.9.] EVIDENGE. G
or described upon any substance by means of letters,
figures or marks or by more than one of these means,
intended to be used or which may be used for the
purpose of recording that matter.
Altlictti~n 3. Save in so tar as other provision is made in this Law
faw:!d~ules or has been made or shall be made in any other Law in force
of evidence. for the time being, everj Court, in the exercise of its juris-
diction in any civil or criminal proceeding, shall apply,
so far as circumstances may permit, the lawand rules of
8evidence as in force in England on the 5th day of November,
1914. .
~fi~;s~~- 4. (1) In any civil proceeding where direct oral evidence
do~umentary of a fact would be admissible, any statement made by a
~Vlte~e. as person in a document and tending to establish that fact
i~u~ ýn shall, on production of the original document, be admissible
as evidence of that fact if the following conditions are
satisfied; that is to say-
(a) if  the maker of the statement either-
(i) had personal knowledge of the matters
dealt with by the statement; or
(ü) where the document in question is or
forms part of a  record purporting to be a  con-
tinuous record, made the statement (in so far as
the matters dealt with thereby are not within
his personal knowledge) in the performance of a
duty to record information supplied to him by a
person who had, or might reasonably be sup-
posed to have, personal knowledge of those
matters; and
(b) subject to subsection (2) of this section, if  the maker
of the statement is called as a  witness in the
proceedings:
Provided that the condition that t~e maker of
8the statement shall be called as a  wýtness need
not be satisfied if  he is dead or unfit by reason of
his bodily or mental condition to attend as a
witness, or if  he is beyond the seas and it  is not
reasonably practicable to secure his attendance,
or if  all reasonable efforts to find him have been
made without success.
(2) In any civil proceedings, the Court may, at any stage
of the proceedings, if  having regard to all the circumstances
of the cage it  is satisfied that undue detay or expense would

8 EV/DENGE. [GAP. 9. 3 i
otherwise be caused, order that such a statement as is
mentioned in subsection (1) of this section shal1 be ad~
missible as evidence or may, without any such order having
been made, admit such a statement in evidence-
(a) notwithstanding that the maker of the statement is
available but is not called as a witness;
(b) notwithstanding that the origina! document is not
produced, if  in lieu thereof there is produced a
copy of the original document or ot the material
8 part thereot certifýed to be a true copy in such
manýýer as may be specifýed in the order or as the
Court may approve, as the cage may be.
(3) Nothing in this section shal1 render admissible as
evidence any statement made by a person interested at a
time when proceedings were pending or anticipated involv-
ing a dispute as to any fact which the statement might tend
to establish.
(4) For the purposes of this section, a  statement in a
document sh all not be deemed to have been made by a
person unless the document or the material part thereof was
written, made or produced by him with his own hand, or
was signed or initialled by him or otherwise recognized by
him in writing as one for the accuracy of which he is
responsible.
(5) For the purpose of deciding whether or not a state-
ment is admissible as evidence by virtue of the foregoing
provisions, the Court may draw any reasonable interence
from the form or contents of the document in which the
statement is contained, or from any other circumstances,
and may, in deciding whether or not a person is fýt to attend
as a  witness, act on a  certifýcate purporting to be the
certifýcate of a registered medical practitioner, and the
a Court may in its discretion reject the statement notwith-
..standing that the requirements of this section are satisfýed
with respect thereto, if  for any reason it  appears to it  to be
expedient in the interests of justice that the statement
should be admi tted.
(6) Nothing in this section sha!l prejudice the admissibility
of any evidence which would, apart from the provisions of
this section, be admissible or enable documentary evidence
to be given as to any declaration relating to a  matter of
pedigree, it  that declaration would not have been admissible
as evidence it this La w had not been enacted.

4- CAP. 9.] EV/DENGE. G ~
~eiý~tlod 5. (1) In estimating the weight, if  any, to be attachedto i
to :vi~~n~e. a  statement rendered admissible as evidence by section 4 of
this Law, regard shall be had to all the circumstances from
which any inference can reasonably be drawn as to the
accuracy or otherwise of the statement, and in particnlar
to the question whether or not the statement was made
contemporaneously with the occurrence or existence of the
facts stated, and to the question whether or not the maker
of the statement had any incentive to concea! or misrepre-
seni the facts,
8(2) For the purpose of any role of law or practice requiring
evidence to be corroborated or regulating the manýýer in
which uncorroborated evidence is  to be treated a  statement
rendered admissible as evidence by section 4  of this Law
shall not be treated as corroboration of evidence given by
the maker of the statement,
.Ev~dence in 6. A plaintiff in any action for breach of promise of
actions for .
hall'dtIh.hbreach of mamage S not recover ]u gmen un ess ýs or er
promise. testimony is corroborated by some other material evidence
in support of such promise. The fact that the defendant
did not answer letters affýrming that he had promised to
marry the plaintiff is not such corroboration.
Claim upon 7. A claim upon the estate of a deceased person, whether
~~~~t;s~~ founded upon an allegation of debt or of gift, shall not be
person. maintained upon the uncorroborated testimony of the
claimant, unless circumstances appear or are proved which
make the claim antecedently probable, or throw the burden
of disproving it  on the representatives of the deceased.
Evidence in 8. In all cases of treason and of misprision of treason the
~e:s~~ and person charged with such offence may be convicted upon
misprision of the like evidence as if such person stood charged with
treason.
dmur er,
U~swom 9. No person shall be convicted of an offence upon the 8
evýdence of .
dfhildf  tdIhchild of unswom evý ence o a c o en er years un ess suc
tender unswom evidence is corroborated by materia! evidence
years. implicating the accused.
P~cul~s 10. Any Court, before which any preliminary inquiry is
ofýmmedýate,
Idbfh,hdfcomplaint beýng he or e üre w ýc any person accuse o any
~ay~egiven offence is  being tried, may receive in evidence, on behalf of
ýn evýdence '
h.
IfI.
ton behalf of the prosecutýon, t  e  partýcu ars o any comp aýn or any
t!ýe prosecu- statement relating to the offence made by the person on
tion.

EVIDENGE. [CAP. 9. 5 i
8 whom the offence has been committed, or the person in
charge of any property against which the offence has been
committed and who was present when the offence was so
committed:
Provided that the particulars of any such complaint or
statement shall not be admissible on behalf of the prosecu-
tion unless it appears to the Court before which a  pre-
liminary inquiry is being held or the Court before which
the accused person is being tried that the complaint or
statement has been made, having regard to the circum-
8 stances of the cage, immediately af ter the commission of the
offence, and to the first person or persons to whom the person
making the complaint or statement spoke af ter the com-
mission of the offence, or to the person or persons to whom
the Court considers that it was natural that he would
complain or make a statement regarding the offence.
11. (1) Where, upon the trial on information of a person .statemen!S
accused of any offence, any witnesses shall make any tion~~~:~~
material statement of fact in direct contradiction to a  wards
statement of fact contained in his deposition or shall deny ::~~cted
or state that he does not recollect that he had made any co~sidere.d as
such statement, the deposition may be put in evidence; ~~~c~~~s.
and if it appears to the Court, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case, that the statement therein
contained is true (notwithstanding that the witness has so
contradicted or denied it  or has stated as aforesaid), it  shall
be lawful for the Court, in considering whether the accused
person has or has not committed the offence charged against
him in the information or any offence for which he may
be lawfullyconvicted by the Court on his trial, to treat the
statement of fact contained in the deposition as the true
evidence of the witness and to act upon it  accordingly:
Provided that the Court shall not treat the statement of
fact contained in the deposition of a witness as his evidence,
8 unless it  appears to the Court that the fact deposed to by
the witness is corroborated by other evidence in the cage.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the word II deposi-
tion "  shall have the same meaning as in the Criminal Cap. 155.
Procedure Law.
12. (1) Any document purporting to be a  certificate or ~exi~r;:t:~d
report under the hand of any scientific expert on any ad~issibl~ in
matter or thing which has been submitted to him for '~~:Ý~c~i~~
examination, analysis or report shall be admissible in any cumstances.
-20/6/57.
/

6 CAP.9.] EV/DENGE.
crimina! proceeding as evidence of the facts stated there O
without proof of the signature or appointment of such
scientific experi, unless the Court, acting ex proprio motu
or at the request of a  party to the proceeding, requires any
such scientific expert to be called as a witness.
(2) In this section the expression tt scientific expert"
refers to-
(a) the offýcers from time to time holding the following
appointments in the public service of the
Colony or acting in such appointments:- 8
(i) Senior Specialist (Pathologist);
(ii) Ana!yst;
(iii) Inspector of Mines;
(b) any offýcer or person declared by the Governor,
by order made with the advice and assistance
of the Chief J ustice and published in the 1
Gazette, to be a scientific expert for the purposes '
of this section. t
Who a:e t 13. Subject to section 14 of this Law, all persons sha!l be
:~ý:s:~. competent to give evidence in any proceedings, whether
civil or crimina!, unless the Court considers that theyare
prevented by reason of tender years, mental incapacity or
any other cause of the same kind from knowing that they
ought to speak the truth or from understanding questions
put to them or from giving rationa! answers to those
questions.
ý:n~~~ 14. (1) Subject to subsection (2), in crimina! proceedings
against any person, the husband or wife, as the case may be,
of such person shall not be a competent witness for the
prosecution against that person nor a  compellable witness
against any other person jointly charged with him or her.
(2) The husband or wife of a person charged- 8
(a) with infiicting or attempting to infiict any bodily
injury or violence upon him or her or upon any
of his or her children;
(b) with an offence under any of the sections of the
Schedule Criminal Code, set out in the Schedule to this
g:~: ~~~: Law, or under section 54 of the Children Law,
shall be a  competent witness for the prosecution against the
person so charged and a  compellable witness against any
other person jointly charged with him or her.
~

18 EV/DENGE. [CAP. 9. .'
(3) Nothing in this section shall make a  husband com-
pellable to disclose any communication made to him by his
Wife during the marriage or a  wife compellable to disclose
any communication made to her by. her husband during
the marriage.
15. In any proceedings, whether civil or criminal, there
t~resumPt-
LL.hfdd.ýons as o
sha , ýn t e case o a ocument prove , or purportýng to documents
be not less than twenty years old, be made the same pre- tw~ty Id
8sumption which before the commencement of this Law ye o.
would have been made in the case of a document of !ike
character proved, or purporting, to be not less than thirty
years old.
16. In any proceedings, whether civil or criminal, an ~oofof
instrument to the validity of which attestation is requisite ~~s~:ý~~~
may, instead of being proved by an attesting witness, be of whic~ .
do
h.hOh.to
htbdO
fattestatýon prove ýn t  e  manýýer ýn w ýc i mýg e  prove i no is necessary.
attesting witness were alive:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the
proof of Wills or other testamentary documentso
17. An
y  document executed- ~dm~ssion
ýn evýdence
(a) in the United Kingdom or in any other place in ofdocuments
which Her Majesty exercises jurisdiction (other ~~~~~ted out
than the Colony), and purporting to have affýxed, CoIony.
impressed, or subscribed thereon or thereto- 3016{57.
(i) in the case of powers of attorney the seal
and signature of a notary public or an officer
authorized by law in any such place to perform
the functions of a  notary public;
(ii) in the case of documents other than
powers of attorney, the seal and signature of
any justice of the peace, or any commissioner
8for oaths, notary public or other officer
authorized by law in any part of the United
Kingdom or any such other place in which
Her Majesty exercises jurisdiction to administer
-an oath or to do any notarial act;
(b) in any foreign country or place, and purporting
to have affixed, impressed or s'Ubscribed thereon
or thereto the seal and signature of any of the
following persons, namely, any British ambassa-
dor, envoy, minister, charge d'affaires, or any
secretary of embassy or legation exercising his
c. o

8" .CAP..9.],EVIDENCE,- O
functions in any foreign country, or any British
consul-genera! consul, vice-consul, pro-consul,
and consular agent exercising his functions in
any foreign place, in testimony of any oath,
affýdavit, or act administered, taken, or done
by or before any such person as aforesaid,
sha11, unless any other specifýc provision is  made in respect
of aiýy matter orthing in any Law in force for the time being,
be admitted in evidenge in any Court of the Colony or in
any proceeding or transaction under any Law in force for
8the time being, without proof of the seat or signature of
any such person, or of his 'offýcia! character,
Cer~e~ 18. Where any register is kept or any entry or record is
~~~~~~~, made, under any Law in force for the time being, an extract
:~ide~c~e ther.efrom or a copy thereof purport~ng to ~e signed a,nd
certýfýed as a  true copy by the person havýng authonty
to keep the register or make the entry or record, shall be
admissible, in any proceedings whether civil or criminal,
as evidenge of all that is stated therein relating to such
register, entry or record.
8
'\ -

8 EVIDENGE. [GAP. 9. ,9
SCHEDULE.
(Section 14.)
OFFENCES.
Criminal Code, Gap. 154.
.,..,
Section. Marginal note.
8
144. Definition of rape.
146. Attempt.
148. Abduction.
149. Abduction of girls under sixteen.
150. Compulsion of mamage.
151. Indecent assault on females.
152. Indecent assault on males.
153. Defilement of girls under thirteen years of age.
155. Defilement of idiots or imbeciles.
156. Suppression of brothels.
157. Procuration.
158. Allowing child or young person to frequent a brothel.
159. Procuring defilement of woman by threats, or fraud or
administering drugs.
160. Householder, etc., permitting defýlement of woman under
thirteen years on his premises.
161. Householder permitting defilement of woman under sixteen
years of age on his premises.
162. Detention with intent or in brothel.
164. Person living on earnings of prostitution or persistently
soltciting.
171. Unnatural offences.
178. Fraudulent pretence ofmamage.
179. Bigamy.
181. Exposure of child.
185. Child stealing.
209. Infanticide.
221. Responsibility of person who has charge of another.
222. Duty of head of family.
8 223. Duty of master.
,
o (2)