

8 CAP. 2.5. i
,
TYPRUS
8
ACRICUL TURAL DEBTORS
CHAPTER 2.5 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITlO,,",
8
PRINTED BY .
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY. LONDON. W.l.
[A ppointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959

2 ~;,.CAP. 25.] AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS., el
~
CHAPTER 25.
AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title 00. 00. .00 00. .00 3
2 Interpretation o.. 000 0.0 000 3
83 Establishment of Debt Settlement Board 00. 0.0 5
4 Principaloffice ofBoard to be at Nicosia 000 o.. 6
, 5 Appointment of officers and servants of the Board .o. ..o 6
6 jurisdiction of Board 00. 000 00. .00 6
7 Powers of Chairman to regulate duties of members of Board 000 6
8 Quorum of Board 00. ..0 000 00. 6
9 Application to Board for settlement of debts 000 00. 7
10 Application for settlement of joint debts .00 000 7
11 Form and veriftcation of application o'. .00 .00 9
12 Statement of debts to be inçluded in application 00. .00 9
13 Application may be withdrawn with leave of the Board o o o II
14 Application not to abate by reason of debt or bankruptcy .00 II
15 General power of Board to amend application .0.0 .00 II
16 Procedureonreceiptofapplication o.. 000 00. II
17 Power of the Board to cause inquiry to be made into application
etco, by officer authorized in that behalf .00 .00 II
18 Further statements of debts 0.0 0.0 ..0 12
19 Production of documents .00 00. .00 12
20 Board to attempt amicable settlement o o o o o o ...13
21 Power of Board to require attendance of persons and production of
documents and to receive evidence 000 .00 .00 13
22 Powertodismissapplications 00. 00. .0. 13
23 Power to determine amounts of debts 000 .0. 00. 14
24 Power to settle debts o.. 0.0 .00 .00 15
25 Decision by Board as to whether a  person is a  debtor o.. o.. 16
26 Adjustment of an insolvent debtor's debts .00 000 16
27 Awards 000 000 00. ..0 .00 18
28 Existing mortgages, attachments, etc., to subsist 00. .00 19
29 Lodging of awards in Court and copy to District Lands Office 00. 19
30 Recovery of amounts included in an award 00 21
31 Distribution of sale proceeds o.. .00 .00 24
32 Stay of proceedings before the Board 00. 00. 0.0 25
33 Bar to actions and other proceedings o.. .00 00. 26
34 Stayand abatement of actions or applications .00 000 26
35 Bar to execution of certain Court judgments or orders and of other
proceedings 00 00. 27
36 Certain Court judgments or orders to be treated as nullities o o o 27
37 Atiachment of debtor's immovable property ...000 28
838 Bartoappeaýorrevision 000 00. 000 .00 28
39 Power of Board to review its decisions, orders and awards .00 28
40 Rectifýcation of award in certain cases .00 .00 o.. 28
41 Certain Laws not to apply to proceedings before the Board under this
Law o.. .0. .00 0.0 00. 29
42 Representation of a  party before the Board 000 o.. 29
43 Publication of orders and awards 00 .00 29
44 Certain persons deemed to be persons employed in the public service o o. 29
45 Proceedings deemed to be judiciaý proceedings 000 000 29
46 Extension of period of limitation 000 00 30
47 Negotiability of awarded amounts .00 00. .0. 30
48 Oflences and penaýties ..0 .., 000 000 30
50 Saving .0. 00' ". 00. .0. 32
51 ProvisionsofthisLawtoprevail ...000 ...32

8 AGRICUL~URA: D:BTORS. [CAP. 25. ~ i
A LA W TO PROVIDE FOR THE RF.LIEF OF INDEBTEDNESS OF
,AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS IN THE COLONY.
[1st june, 1940]. 1949Cap.36.
ý. This Law ma y  be cited as the Agricultural Debtors Short title.
Relief Law.
2 In this La w- Int.erpre-
.tation.
8 tt action "  includes all proceedings of a  civil fiatlife
before any Court of law;
tt agriculture "  includes horticulture, sericulture and
dairy farming and the use of land for any purpose of
husbandry inclusive of the keeping or breeding of live
stock, poultry or bees and the growing of fmits,
vegetables and the like ;
tt amatint payable under an award" means an
amatint included under section 27 (1) (e) in an award as
payable by a  debtor in respect of any debt or any part
of such amatint which remains unpaid, together with -.
any interest on such amatint or part thereof which is
due under the award ;
tt award "  means an award as made by aBoard under
section 24 (5) or section 26 ;
tt Board" means the Debt Settlement Board estab-
lished under the provisions of section 3 (1), and includes
any members of the Board authorized under the
provisos to section 8  ;
ttCo-operative Society" means a co-operative society
registered or deemed to be registered under the provi-
sions of the Co-operative Societies Law; Cap. 114.
tt debt "  includes allliabilities of a  debtor in money
or in kind secured or unsecured, whether payable
8under a  judgment or order of a  Court of Law or under
any agreement for thesale of immovalýle property or
otherwise, and whether payable presently or in future,
and allliabilities of a  debtor arising out of any transac-
tion which is, in the apiýýion of the Board, in substance
a  loan :
Provided that it  shall not ÝncIlide the following-
(ar any amatint the liability for the payment of
which is only contingent ;
(b) any share of the produce of land payable on
account of land cultivated in partnership;
c. t

4 CAP. 25.] AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. 8 i
(c) any amount recoverable-
,Cap, 329. (i) as a tax or duty under the Tax Collection
Law, or
Cap. 155. (ii) as a penalty under the Criminal Proce-
dure Law;
(d) any amount an action for the recovery of which
is barred by lapse of time under the provisions
of any Law in force for the time being, except
where such amount can be recovered by
Ý-z 014/43. proceedings taken or which may be taken
Cap. 233. under the provisions of the Sale of Mortgaged
Property Law;
(e) any loan made by the Agricultural Bank of
Cyprus Limited;
(1) any Govemment loan assigned to the Agricultural
Bank of Cyprus Limited under the provisions
of the Agricultural Bank of Cyprus Limited
Cap. 122. (Special Privileges) Law, which Govemment
loan when so assigned shall, for all the pur-
..poses of this Law, be deemed to be a loan made
by the Agricultural Bank of Cyprus Limited;
(g) any loan made by a  Co-operative Society ;
(h) all wages or salary of any clerk or servant in
respect of services rendered to the debtor
during two months next preceding the date
of an application under section 9, not exceed-
ing ten pounds ;
(i) all wages of any labourer or workman not exceed-
ing three polinds, whether payable for time or
for piece-work, in respect of services rendered
to the debtor during one month before the
date of an application under section 9  ;
(j) all amounts, not exceeding in any individual case
Ý-twenty polinds, due in respect of compensa-
tion under the Mines and Quarries (Regula-
Cap. 270. tion) Law, the liability whereof accrued
before the date of an application under
section 9  ;
II debtor "  means a  debtor-
(a) whose primary means of livelihood is agricul-
ture ;  and
(b) who cultivates land by himseli or by members
of his family or by hired labourers; and

8 .AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. [GAP. 25.5 i
(c) who is the owner of immovable property the
,assessed value of which as shown in the
books of the District Lands Office does not
in the aggregate exceed the sum of one
thousand and five hundred polinds.
and includes a  group of persons who join in making an
application under section 10 (1) ;
ýý family" means the spouse, son, daughter, father
and mother of the debtor, or any of them, who may be
8 wholly or in part dependent upon the earnings of such
debtor ;
it member of the Board " and It members of the
Board" include the Chairman of the Board and every
Vice-Chairman of the Board;
tt settlement "  includes an amicable settlement and a
compulsory settlement or adjustment made by order
of the Board ; .
tt suppý.ementary income "  means any income derived
by thedebtor from any source other than agriculture.
3. (1) The Governor may by notification in the Gazette Establish-
establish a  Debt Settlement Board for the purposes of this Se~Ý;ý~:e~bt
Law. Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of such members as the
Governor may from time to time determine, to be appointed
by the Governor:
Provided that the majority of the members of the Board
holding office for the time being sha11 possess legal qualifica-
tions or shall have experience in judicial proceedings.
(3) From among the members of the Board, the
Governor-
..
(a) sha11 appoint a  Chairman, and
8 (b) may appoint such number of Vice-Chairmen as he
may from time to time determine.
(4) Every member of the Board sha11 hold office during the
pleas~re of the Governor who may at any time revoke any
appointment made under subsection (2) or (3).
(5) Every appointment or revocation of appointment
made under this section shall be published in the Gazette.
(6) Every member of the Board may receive such
remllneration or salary as the Governor may determine.
t   (2)
.

:o i
~~~i~~l4. The principal office of the Board shall 'be situated at
,Board to be Nicosia, and the Governor may from time to time by
at Nicosia. notifýcation in the Gazette appoint towns or villages at
which sub-offices of the Board shall be established.
~~E~int 5. The Governor may from time to time appoint officers
of officers and servants of the Board who shall perform such dutiesas
~~;:~:r~. may be assigne~ to them by the Chai:man of the Board and
who may receýve such remuneratýon or salary as the
Governor may determine. Ý-
J;~ic:on 6. In the exercise of the powers conferred upon the Board
o ar. by this Law the Board shall have jurisdiction throughout
the Colony, and for this purpose the Board shall hold
sittings at such towns or villages as the Chairman may
from time to time direct.
~~:=~\o 7. The disposition and distribution of the duties ?f the
regulate several members of the Board shal.ý be regulated from týme to
duties of time by the Chairman.
members of
Board.
~uorum of 8. (1) Every application or matter which by this Law the
oard. Board is empowered to hear or determine shaýý be heard and
determined by the Chairman and not less than two members
of the Board :
Provided that any two or more members of the Board if
authorized in that behalf by the Chairman by an instrument
in writing under his hand may hear and determine any such
application or matter and in every such case every order,
decision or award made in respect thereof by such members
shall bedeemed to have been made by the Board :
Provided further that whenever any application or matter
is heard by two members of the Board and the two members
differ in apinion, such difference shall be reported by them Ý-
to the Chairman of the Board who shall thereupon authorize
by an instrument in writing under his hand any other
member of the Board to hear and determine, together with
the original two members, such application or matter.
3 of 4/43. (2) Where an instrument in writing has been issued or
made by the Chairman under the fýrst proviso to subsection
(1) of this section, the Chairman may, in the manýýer
therein set out, vary such instrument or substitute anather
therefor :

8 i
Provided that every variation or substitution made under .
this subsection shall be withou~ prejudice to anything done ! i
or left undone under the prevýous ýnstrument. !
(3) At least one of the members of the Board who possess
legal qualifications or have experience in judicial proceedings
shall be present at every sitting of the Board at which any
application or matter is being heard or determined.
89. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 10, a debtor may Application
k1.t.fh1f  h.d  bhto Board foJ'
ma e  an app ýca ýon or t   e  sett ement o ýs e  ts to t  e  settlement
Board within a  period of one year af ter the establrshment of debts.
of the Board.
(2) Unless the debtor has aýready made an application
under subsection (1), any of his creditors may make, within
the period in that subsection mentioned, an application to
the Board.
{3) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection
(1), a Board may for good and suffýcient reason entertain a
further application in respect of any debt incurred before the
date of a first applicatiön undet subsection (1) or subsection
(2), except when such application under either of the said
subsections has been dismissed under section ýs (3) or under
section 22 (1) (b) (ii) or section 22 (2).
(4) The Board shall not entertain any further application
for the settlement of any debt which has been incurred by a
debtor aLter the date of an application under subsection (1)
or subsection (2).
.
..lo. (1) An application maybe made under section 9 (1) for to~p~~~~~_n
the settlement of- ment of
(aj a  debt for which two or more persons are jointly joint debts.
liable or jointly and severally liable either as
8 principal debt.or~ or Qtherwis.e if  all s~ch persons
~re debtors wýthýn the meanýng of thýs Lawand
theyall join in making such application, or
(b) a  debt for which two or more persons are liable as
heirs of a  deceased debtor within the meaning
of this Law if one of such persons is a  debtor
within the meaning of this Lawand theyall
join in making such application,
and the Board maypass orders under this Law regarding any
debt to which such application relates and such orders shall
not be questioned in any action in anyCourt of law.

~~~P. 25.J AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. 8 i
(2) if a  debtor within the meaning of this Law is jointly
,liable or jointly and severally liable as a principal debtor or
otherwise with other persons who are not debtors within the
meaning of this Law, such debtor (hereinafter in this sub-
section ca11ed ýý the appJicant ") may make an application
to the Board under sectiol'Ý 9  (1) in respect of his liability in
regard to such debt, and the Board, af ter consideration of
the facts and circumstances of the case, may pass such
orders as it  thinks fit under this Law regarding the debt so
far as the applicant is c.once~ed, and s~ch .order of the
8Board shall not be questýoned ýn any actýon ýn any Court
of law:
Providedthat-
(a) where the applicant is jointly liable but not jointly
and severally liable with any such other person
as aforesaid for a  debt and the liability of the
applicant in regard to the debt has been deter-
mined by such order, the order shall not affect
the liability of such other person in regard to
such debt ;
(b) where the applicant is  jointly and severa11y liable as
principal debtor with any such other person as
aforesaid for a debt and the liability of the
applicant in regard to the debt has been deter-
mined by such order, the liability of such other
person shall be co-extensive with the liability of
the applicant in respect of the part of the debt
as so determined, or as so determined and as
, subsequently settled in consequence of any
amicable settlement or compulsory settlement
or reduction thereof approved or made by the
Board in virtue of the provisions of sections
24 or 26, as the case may be ;
(c) where the applicant is a  principal debtor and any
such other person a~ a!?resaid is a  su~ety f?r 8
such debt and the liabýlity of the applicant ýn
regard to the debt has been determined by such
order, the liability of such surety sha11 be co-
extensive with the liability of the appIicant as so
determined, or as so determined and as subse-
quently settled in consequence of any amicable
settlement or compulsory settlement or reduc-
tion thereof approved or made by the Board in
virtue of the provisions of section 24 or 26, as
the case m~y be ;

8 AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. [CAP. 25. 9 i
(d) where the applicant is a  surety for any such other .
person as aforesaid who is a  principal debtor in ýI
respect of adebt, it shall not be within the
power of the Board to determine the liability of
such surety but the Board shall take such
liability into consideration in making their
award, and in any such case the person to whom
such debt is due shall not be entitled to recover
such debt by any action from such surety save
8where execution for any such debt can be
levied upon any immovable or movable property 4 of 4/43.
of the surety which is not made security under
the award for the amounts payable thereunder
or where the award has ceased to subsist under
section 31 (4) of this Law.
(3) Where any person has failed to join with any other 4  of 4/43.
person in making an application as required by subsection
(1) of this section and it  is  proved to the satisfaction of the
Board that such failure is due to absence from the Colony
or minority or unsoundness of mind or any other disability
and that such person has no duly appointed representative,
or guardian in the Colony, the Board may, notwithstanding
such fai1ure, determine the liability of such person in respect
of any joint debt to which such application relates and may
settýc such joint debt, and for anyof the purposes aforesaid
the Board may make such amendments to the application
as the Board may think fýt.
11. Every application under section 9  shall be in writing Foý:m aý:ýd
in the .prescribed form and shall be signed and verifýed in the ~fn:;;~_on
prescnbed manner. cation.
12. (1) Any application made to the Board by a  debtor ~t~~~n~ of
under section 9  (1) shall contain a  st at ement of debt, in the i:cluded in
8prescribed form, which shall ÝncIlide the following- application.
(a) the name of the place where he ordinarily resides;
(b) the names and addresses of his creditors, the total
amount claimed by each creditor to be owing to
him in respect of each debt, so far as is  known to
the debtor, whether such debt is a debt as defýned
in this Law or otherwise, and a note whether each
such claim is admitted by the debtor ;
(c) the history of each such debt with particulars of the
original principal and the rate of interest charge-
able;

lOCAP. 25.] AGRICULTURALDEBTORS. O i
(d) details of any debts for which the debtor is liable as
,a  surety or is liable with other persons as a joint
or joint and several debtor or surety together
withthe names and addresses of all such persons;
(e) particulars of the debtor's property both movable
and immovable (including his outstanding claims
against third parties), a specification of its
value and of the places where it may be found,
and details of any mortgage, attachment, lien
or charge subsisting thereon together with the
8names and addresses of the co-owners, if any,
of the debtor ;
(f) particulars of any immovable property which has
been transferred by the debtor within two years
previous to the date of his application together
with the name and address of the transferee ;
(g) particulars of any income of the debtor from
agriculture ;
(h) particulars of any supplementary income of the
debtor; and
(i) a declaration that all his debts and all his properties
have been included in the statement.
(2) An application made to the Board by a  creditor under
section 9 (2) shall contain a statement of debt, in the
prescribed form, which shall ÝncIýýde the following-
(a) the name of the place where the creditor ordinarily
resides;
(b) the total amount of every debt claimed by the
creditor to be owing to him by the debtor ;
(c) the history of each such debt with particulars of the
origina! principal and the rate of Ýnterest
chargeable ;
(d) the names and addresses of the other creditors, so 8
far as theyare known to the creditor ;
(e) particulars, so far as theyare known to the creditor,
of the debtor's property, as in subsection (1) (e) ;
(1) particulars, so far as theyare known to the creditor,
of any income of the debtor from agriculture ;
(g) particulars, so far as theyare known to the creditor,
of any supplementary income of the debtor; and
(h) a  declaration that agriculture is the primary means
of livelihood of the debtor.
-

8 ~--~~~!!!!!!!~!!!:-~~~ i
13:. No deb~or shall withdr~w an application made under ~~pli~tion
,sectýon 9 afthýs Law except wýth the leave of the Board and withdrawn
.subjec.t to such terms: and conditions as the Board may think ~:;~:rd.
fýt to ýmpose. 5 of 4/43.
14. (1.) An application made under section 9  of this Law APtp
tlicatib'ontno oaae
shall not abate by reason of the death of the debtor or of the by reason
death or bankru
ptc y  of any  creditor. of death or
bankruptcy.
(2) Where by reason of death, bankruptcy or other event 5 of 4/43.
8occurring af ter the date of an application made under
section 9  of this Law, the interest or liability of the debtor
or any creditor devolves upon any other person, the Board
may direct the continuance of the application between such
persons and in such capacities as may seem necessary, and
for any of the purposes aforesaid the Board may make such
amendments to the application as the Board may think fýt.
15. The Board may at any time amend any defect, error or Generaif
misdescription in any application made under section 9  of ~'::~ ~o
this Law, and all necessary amendments shall be made for ame~dti
the purpose of enabling the Board to determine and settle ~P~ ~/~3~n.
all debts which can be determined and settled under the
provisions of this Law.
16. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 17, on receipt Pro<:edureon
fLi.d.9hBdhallreceýpt of
o an app catýon un er sectýon ,  t  e oar s pass an application.
order fýxing a date and place for consideration of the
application unless the application is dismissed forthwith
under section 22.
(2) The Board shall, in the prescribed manner, give notice
of such order to the debtor and to all persons whose names
and addresses are given in the application.
(3) The applicant may, at the discretion of the Board, be
examined- on oath or affýrmation on the date fýxed under
8 subsection (1) or on such other date as the Board may fýx
and a memorandum of the substances of the statement made
by the applicant shall be recorded in writing by the Board.
17. (1) The Chairman of the Board may, before the Board Power of the
passes an order under section 16 (1) or at any subsequent ~~a:ed to
stage of the proceedings, by an instrument in writing under inquiry to be
his hand authorize any offýcer of the Board named in such :;p~f~~i~n
instrument to make an inquiry into the application or any etc., by
matter connected therewith in such manner as the Chairman ~~~~rizedin
of the Board may direct. that behalf.
...

12 GAP. 25.J AGRICULTURAL DEB:ORS. 8 i
(2) Every offýcer authorized as in subsection (1) shall for
,the purposes of such inquiry have power to take statements
from any debtor or creditor, interested in the application, ~C
and from any other person who in the opinion of such '
offýcer may be in a position to fumish any information
relevant to such application and shall submit such state-
ments together with areport thereon to the Chairman of the
Board.
~rher t ýs. (1) if af ter consideration of the application the Board
8of :e~:: s does not dismiss the application forthwith under section 22,
the Board shall, in the prescribed manner, cause a notice to
be served on the debtor (unless the debtor is himself the
applicant) and on every creditor whose name and address
are given in the application and also publish a general
notice requiring the debtor and all creditors to submit a
statement of debt in the prescribed form within one month of
the date of service of the notice, or publication of the general
notice, whichever is later :
Provided that, if  the Board is satisfýed that the debtor or
any creditor is for good and suffýcient cause unable to
comply with such notice, the Board may extend the period
for the submission of his statement of debt.
(2) if any creditor fai1s to comply with a notice or a general
notice under subsection (I), the Board may pass an order
declaring that no debt of which the creditor has fai1ed to
submit a  statement, whether such debt has been included
in the debtor's statement of debt or otherwise, shall be
recoverable, and such order shall not be questioned in any
action in any Court of law.
(3) if any debtor fails to comply with a notice ora general
.notice und.er subsection (1), the Board may dismiss the
application :
Provided that an order made under subsection (2) or
under this subsection may be varied or reversed by the 8
Board on an application for review if it is proved to the
satisfaction of the Board that the creditor or debtor or any
person referred to in section 12 (1) (d), as the cage may be,
had no knowledge of the notice or the general notice under
subsection (1) or that he has complied with it  or that he had
suffýcient reason for non-compliance.
~oduction 19. (1) When a  creditor has submitted to the Board a
~ocuments. statement of debt under section 12 (2) or section 18 (1), the
Board shall fýx adate for the production by the creditor of aýý

8 AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. [GAP .25. 13 i
documents (including entries in books of account) by which
,the creditor intends to prove any debt owing to him together
with a true copy of each such document and upon the date
so fýxed the creditor shall produce all such documents to
the Board. .
(2) The Board shall mark in the prescribed manýýer each
original document so produced, keep the copy af ter verifying
its correctness, and return the original to the creditor.
8(3) No document relating to a debt regarding which a
creditor has failed to submit a  statement under section 12
(2) or section 18 (1), and no document which being in the
possession or under the control of the creditor has not been
produced by him as required by subsection (1), shall be
admissible in evidence against the debtor or his successor
in interest in any action by the creditor or by any person
claiming under him for the recovery of the debt to which
such document relates unless it  is proved to the satisfaction
of the Court before which such action is pending that there
were suffýcient reasons for non-production of the document
before the Board.
20. Subject to any rules made under this Law, the Board ~ard ~o
shall call upon the debtor and each creditor to explain his :m~:ble
case regarding each debt, and shall use its best endeavours setýlemeDt.
to induce them to arrive at an amicable settlement:
Provided that no amicable settlement shall be effective
unless and until it  has been approved by the Board under
section 24 (1) (a) and embodied in an award under section
24 (5).
21. (1) Subject to rules made under this Law, the Board ~weJ of
may exercise all such powers connected with the summoning req~ireto
and examining of parties and witnesses and with the a~tendance
production of documents as are conferred upon a  Court of ~nrrsons
8law by the Criminal Procedure Law, or by any Rules of P
frodduction
Cdhdo ocuments
ourt ma e t   ereun er. and to
receive
(2) Any person present may be required by the Board to evidence.
furnish any information or to produce any document then Cap. 155.
and there in his possession or under his control which he
might be required to furnish or produce in a  Court of law.
22. (1) An appIication under section 9  may be dismissed P.ow,:r to
by the Board, at any stage of the proceedings, in respect of ~~~~i~:tions.
all or any of the debts to which it  relates-
(a) if, for reasons to be stated in writing. thelBoard

e i
does not consider it  desirable or practicable to
,effect a  settlement of debts; or
(b) if, in the opinion of the -Board-
(i) the appIicant fai1s to pursue his applica-
tion with due diIigence; or
(ii) the debtor is attempting to use the
provisions of this Law with a  view to defraud
any creditor or any person referred to in section
1Z (1) (d); or ..
(iii) there has been transfer of any property .
by the debtor within two years previous to the
date of such application with a view to defraud
any creditor.
(Z) An appIication under section 9 shall be dismissed by
the Board, if in its opinion-
(a) the appIicant or the person to whom the appIica-
tion relates is not a debtor within the meaning of
this Law; or
(b) such appIication includes a claim which is
intended to defraud any creditor.
6 of 4/43. (3) An application under section 9 of this Law shall alsa be
dismissed by the Board in any of the following cases, that is
to say-
(a) when the appIication is withdrawn by the applicant
with the leave of the Board; or
(b) where the applicant satisfies the Board that he has
settled all his debts.
~~t~:~:e 23. (1) If  there is any do~bt or disp:ute as to th.e existence
amounts or amount of any debi or if  there ýs ar:ý allegatIon on tbe
of debts. part of the debtor that anytransaction relating to the debi
was harsh or.unconsoior:ýable, the Board sh.aýl deride whether ..
the debt exýsts or whether the transactIon was harsh or .
unconscionable and in either cage determine its amatint,
and if in the apiýýion of the Board such transaction was
harsh or unconscionable may set it  aside either wholly or in
part or revise or alter any term or provision thereof:
Provided that a  judgment or order of a  Court of law
relating to a debt other than a judgment or order obtained
or issued by the consent of the p~rties thereto or in default
of appearance of the defendant shall b~ conclusive evidence
as to the existence and amatint of the debt as between the
parties to the judgment or order.

8 ~GRI~ULTUR~L DEB~ORS. [CAP. 25., i
(2) Before passing any ~rde~ under secti,on 24 or section ~
26 the Board, af ter consýdenng the stat:ements of debi i
submitted under section 12 and section ýs (1) and af ter
hearing the parties and considering the evidence produced
shall, in accordance with any rules made under this Law,
determine in respect of each debi the amount of the
principal and the amount of the a,rrears of interest, if  any,
due thereon from the debtor up to the date of such
determination.
8(3) Any decision of the Board under this section in
respect of the existence or non-existence of a  debi or the
amount of a  debi due from a  debtor or of any transaction
telating to a  debi which in its opinion was harsh or un-
conscionable shall not be questioned in any action in any
Court of law.
24. (1) Subject to the provisions of subsections (2), (3) Po~eý- dt~
and (4) and of Rules made under this Law- sette e ts.
(a:) when any creditor agrees in respect of any debi
owing to him to an amicable settlement with the
debtor and such amicable settlement is approved
by the Board, the Board shall record such settle-
ment in writing; or
(b) when any creditor fails to agree in respect of any
debi owing to him to an amicable settlement
with the debtor or when an amicable settlement
agreed to between the debtor and a  creditor is
not approved by the Board, the Board may
proceed to make a compulsory settlement of
such debi and may pass an order accordingIr.
(2) The Board-
(a) in approving an amicable settlement as in sub-
section (1) (a), or
8(b) in making a compuslory settlement as in
sub-section (1) (b),
shall have regard to the capacity of the debtor to pay his
total debi by annual equal instalmeýýig (comprising capital
and interest at a  uniform rate not exceeding seven but not
less than fýve per centum per annum as the Board may
determine) spread over a period not exceeding fýfteen years
af ter making such provision as the Board may consider
necessary-
(i) for the maintenance of the debtor and his family,
c -if any; and

l6 CAP. 25.J AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. G i
(ii) for the payment by the debtor of the expenses, if
,any, 'required for the cultivation of his tand and
for harvesting; and
(iii) for the payment by the debtor of his liabilities,
if any, under the proviso to the defýnition of
debt in section 2.
(3) The Board in making a  compulsory settlement as in
subsection (l) (b) may reduce any debt as determined under
section ýo or 23, or regarding the amount of which there is no
8doubt or dispute, by not more than one-third.
(4) For the purposes o~ subsection (2) the term ii  total
debt "  means the sum total of all debts which have been
determined under section ýo or 23, or regarding the amatint
of which there is no doubt or dispute.
(5) The terms of any settlement of debt under this
section sha11 be embodied in an award to be made by the
Board.
Decision by 25. if any question arises in connection with proceedings
~:~ea: ato before the Board under this Law, whether a person is a
person is debtor or not, the Board shall decide the matter and such
a debtor. decision shall not be questioned in any action in any Court
of law.
Adjustment 26. (1) When the Board is satisfýed that the debts of a
f~:Ofvent debtor are such that they cannot be settled in manýýer
debtor's provided by section 24, the Board, af ter cangidering all the
debts. circumstances of the debtor, may-
(a) if satisfýed that the debtor is a fýt person to be
given the benefýt of this paragraph, by a  written
order declare him to be insolvent for the
purposes of this Lawand, subject to any Rules
made under this Law, may thereafter by an
8award reduce his debts to such amounts as it
considers that he can pay by annual equal
instalments (comprising capital and interest at a
uniform rate not exceeding seven but not less
than fýve per centum per annum as the Board
may determine) within a  period not exceeding
fýfteen years to be mentioned in the award:
Provided that no order shall be passed by the
Board under this paragraph except with the
prior sanction of the Governor in Council to be

8 -AGRICULTURAL DERTORS. [CAP. 25. ~ i
obtained and signified as in subsection (4)
,provided; or
(b) if, for reasons to be recorded in writing, it  does not
cangider that the debtor is  a fit person to be
given the heDefit of paragraph (a), dismiss the
appIication.
(2) When the Board reduces the debts of a  debtor under
subsection (1) (a) the Board shall specify in the award what
sum he shall pay in each year towards the settlement of the
8debts as so reduced and in what manýýer such sums shall be
distributed among the creditors:
Provided that in specifying the sum which the debtor sha1l
pay in each year as aforesaid, the Board sha1l have regard
to the capacity of the debtor to pay af ter making such
provision as the Board may cangider necessary-
(a) for the maintenance of the debtor and his family,
if any; and
(b) for the payment by the debtor of the expenses, if
any, required for the cultivation of his land and
for harvesting; and
(c) for the payment by the debtor of his liabilities, if
any, under the proviso to the definition of debt
in section 2.
(3) An order passed by a Board under subsection (1) (a)
shall be embodied in an award to be made by the Board.
(4) Where the Board is of apiýýion that the debtor is a  fit
person to be given the heDefit of subsection (1) (a), before
the Board passes an order thereunder the Chairman of the
Board sha1ltransmit to the AdministrativeSecretaryareport
in such form and containing such particulars as may be
prescribed by special directions issued by the Governor in
Council and notified to the Chairman of the Board.
(5) Upon receipt of a report as in subsection (4) provided,
8 the Administrative Secretary sha1l submit it to the
Governor in Council for his cangideratÝaD.
(6) if the Governor in Council sanctions the report, he
sha1l signify his sanction in such form as the Governor in
Council may determine, and the Administrative Secretary
shall notify such sanction to the Chairman of the Board
and thereupan the Board may pass an order under sub-
section (1) (a).
(7) If the Governor in Council does not sanction the
report, a  notification theraf shall be made by the Adminis-

18; CAP.25.] AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. O i
trative Secretary to the Chairman of the Board and there-
,upon the Board shall dismiss the application to which
the report relates.
Awards. 27. (1) An award shall be in the prescribed form and shall
7 of 4/43. contain the following particulars and such other particulars
as may be prescribed-
(a) a  list of the movable properties of the debtor on
which any attachment, lien or charge subsists on
the date on which the award is made, with 8
particulars of such attachment, lien or charge; -
(b) the names of the towns, villages or quarters within
the boundaries of which all the immovable
properties belonging to the debtor on the date on
which the award is made are situated;
(c) an order that-
(i) all the immovable properties belQnging
to the debtor on the date on which the award is
made and situated within the boundaries of the
towns, villages or quarters named in the award;
and
(ii) all the movable properties of the debtor
mentioned in the list referred to in paragraph (a)
of this subsection;
except such immovable and movable properties as
may be exempted by the Court under the provisions
of section 30 (3) of this Law, shall, subject to any
mortgage, attachment, lien or charge subsisting
thereon on the date on which the award is made, be
security for the amounts payable under the
award;
(d) an order that-
(i) where any immovable property belonging
to the debtor in respect of which a  mortgage
8subsists in favour of the Agricultural Bank of
Cyprus Limited or of any Co-operative Society,
as the cage may be, has been saId af ter the date
on which the award is made at the instance of
the mortgagee; and
(ii) where af ter satisfying the loan in respect
of which such immovable property has been
saId, there remains any surplus of the proceeds
: of the sale,
such surplus shall be paid into the Court in which

8 AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. [CAP. 25.19 i
the award was lodged and shall be uti1ized by the ~
Court in payment or part-payment, as the case i i
may be, of any amount due and remaining unpaid i
under the award.
(2) At a  place and time of which notice shall be given
to the debtor and his creditors in the prescribed manýýer the
award shall be explained to the debtor and the creditors
preseni and shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, be
signed by at least two members of the Board;
8 Provided that the award may be explained to the debtor
and his creditors preseni at the sitting of the Board at which
all the debts have been determined and settled:
Provided further that the validity of the award sha11 not
be affected by the absence of the debtor or any his creditors.
(3) From the date of the signing of the award under
subsection (2) of this section it  shall, in supersession of all
previous judgments or orders of a  Court of law in respect
of the debts mentioned in it, be binding on the debtor and
his creditors and on the successors in interest of such debtor
and creditors.
28. (1) When an award is made as regards any debi EXl
rt.Sting
h.h.
dbhtlimo gages,
W ýc ýs secure y any mortgage, attac men, en or attachment.."
charge on any movable or immovable property of a debior, et~,.t~
such mortgage, attachilleni, lien or charge shall subsist to su SiS.
the extent of the amount payable in respect of such debi
under the award until such amount has been paid or the
property has been sold for the satisfaction of such debi or
the award has ceased to subsist under the provisions of
section 31 (4).
(2) Any mortgage of immovable property given as
security for the payment of a  debi and any attachment or
8charge upon any immovable property securing a debi on
account of which any amourit is  payable under a  judgment
or order of a  Court of law shall cease to subsist when such
property is sold under the provisions of section 30.
29. (1) if within a period of thirty days from the signing Lodging:of
fdddh..ft.24awards m O an awar ma e  un er t  e  provýsýons o sec ýon or Court and
under the provisions of section 26 no application for review co.PY~o
has been made under section 39 (1) or if  such an application ~~~sct
has been made then as soon as may be af ter the Board has Office.
heard and determined the same, the Chairman of the Board
c. u
,

20CAP.25.] AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. G i
shall cause the award to be lodged withthe Registrar of the .
District Court of the District in which the debtor ordinarily 11
resides. !
(2) Upon the lodging pf an award as in subsection (1)
provided, the Registrar of the District Court shall endorse it
with the words "  Lodged with me at the District Court of
'this day of ,  19 ",
and shall sign the endorsement.
(3) Af ter the endorsement of the award as in subsection (2)
8provided, the award shall, when such occasion arises, be
executed as in section 30 provided, and the Registrar of the
District Court shall, as soan as conveniently may be af ter
such endorsement-
(a) cause a  notice to be served-
(i) upon the debtor named in the award
informing him that the award has been duly
lodged with the Registrar at the District Court
and specifying the amounts payable by him
thereunder and the dates upon which theyare
payable and requiring him to pay the same into
Court accordingly; and
(ii) upon every creditor named in the award
informing him that the award has been duly
lodged with the Registrar at the District Court
and specifying the amounts payable to him by
the debtor thereunder and the dates upon which
theyare payable and that he may attend at the
office of the Registrar to receive payment of the
same, if  paid, not earlier than one week af ter the
said dates; and
8 of 4/43. (b) cause a  copy of the award endorsed as aforesaid to
be lodged with the District Lands Office of the
District in which any immovable property of the
debtor which is security for the amounts payable 8
unde!" the award is gittiated.
(4) The lodging of a  copy of the award with the District
8 of4/43. Lands Office as in subsection (3) (b) shall operate as an
attachment on all the immovable properties of the debtor
which are security for the amounts payable under the award.
(5) Nothing in this section contained shall be deemed to
prevent any debtor from paying into Court all or any
amounts payable by him to all the creditors under the
award before the dates upon which the same are payable
,

18 AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS, [CAP.25. 21 i
under the award, and the Registrar of the District Court
,shall refuse to receive payment into Court of any amounts
tendered by the debtor for payment only to a  particular
creditor named in the award:
Provided that where the debtor pays into Court under this
subsection any amounts as aforesaid there shall be deducted
therefrom such amount in respect of unaccrued interest
thereon as may be presoribed by rules made under this Law,
8(6) Where any amounts have been paid into Court as in
subsection (5) provided, the Registrar of the District Court
shall, as soan as conveniently may be thereafter, cause a
notice to be served upon every creditor named in the
award-
(a) informing him of the payment of such amounts into
Court;
(b) specifying the amounts payable to him thereout;
and
(c) requesting him to attend at the office of the Regis-
trar to receive payment of the same,
30. (1) if af ter the award has been lodged with, and Recoveryof
ddbthR'fhD' 'C' amounts
en orse y, e egýstrar o t   e ýstnct ourt as ýn included in
section 29 provided, the debtor named in the award shall an award.
make default in the payment of any amount due and
payable thereunder and such default shall continue for a
period exceeding twelve months af ter the date fýxed therein
for tbe payment of the same, the creditor to whom such
amount became due and payable may by an ex parte
application to the District Court, accompanied by a
certifýcate under the hand of the Registrar of the District
Court to the effect that the debtor has made default as
aforesaid, apply for an order declaring that all the amounts
payable under the award af ter deducting therefrom un-
8 accrued interest shall be payable forthwith and thereupon 9 of 4{43.
the District Court shall make an o,rder accordingly:
Provided that if the immovable properties of the debtor
from which he derives his primary means of livelihood are
situated within any area declared to be adistressed area
by an Order made by the Governor in Council and published
in the Gazette, the District Court may, during the contin-
uance in operation of such Order of the Governor in
Council, allow such further time for the payment of the
amount in respect of which such default was made as the
District Court may deem fýt,
u (2)
,

22 CAF. 25.J AGRýctTLYURAL DEBYORS. 18 i
(2) Where an order has been made by the District Court .
as in sub~ection (1) provided, the D.is.trict Court sha.n' of its ! i
own motýon but subJect to the provýsýons of subsectýon (3),
9 oj 4{43. proceed to the sale of the immovable properties and movable
properties of the debtor whichare security for the amounts
payable under the award and of any other immovable or
movable properties of the debtor and for these purposes
sha11 cause any unregistered immovable property of the
debtor mentioned in the award tq be registered in the
debtor's name and shall issue all writs or orders of execution
8which the District Court is empowered to issue in respect of
its own judgments.
(3) Before the Court proceeds to the sale of the immovable
properties and movable properties of the debtor as in sub-
section (2) provided, the following provisions shall be
complied with-
(a) the Court-
(i) sha11 set aside so much land of the debtor
as in the opinion of the Court sha11 be absolutely
necessary for the support of the debtor and his
family, if  any; and
(ii) where the immovable properties of the
debtor consist in whole or in part of a  house or
houses there shall be left to or provided for the
debtor such house accommodation as shall in
the opinion of the Court be absolutely necessary
for the debtor and his family, if  any; and
(b) the following movable properties of the debtor
sha11 be exempted from the sale-
.(i) the necessary wearing apparel of the
debtor and his family, the necessary box or
wardrobe for preserving the same and the
necessary beds and bedding of the debtor and his
family;
8(ii) the necessary baking and cooking utensils
of the debtor and his family;
(iii) the books, tools, implements, vessels and
receptacles absolutely necessary for the purpose
, of enabling the debtor to obtain his primary
means of livelihood from agriculture, not exceed-
ing in the whole the value of ten pounds;
(iv) one pair of neat cattle, or two camels,
or one mule and one ass, or two asses, at the
option of the debtor, and alternatively to the

18 i
ýoregoing provision two horses or one horse or
,mule and one of the aforesaid animals at the
option of the debtor.
(v) every article which is indispensable to
the use of the exempted animals;
(vi) the fodder required to feed the exempted
animals for three months;
(vii) provisions for three months for the
debtor and his family;
8 (viii) seed grains sufficient for sowing in
respect of one year the extent of the land set
aside under the provisions of paragraph (a) (i);
and
(c) the Court shall not proceed to the sale of any
immovalýle properties of the debtor on which
there is any mortgage in favour of the Agri-
cultural Bank of Cyprus Limited or of any 9 of 4/43.
Co-operative Society except-
(i) with the consent of the Agricultural Bank
of Cyprus Limited or of the Co-operative Society
concerned, as the case may be; and
(ii) subject to the fýxing by the Court of a
reserve price representing the total amount due
and to become due under such mortgage:
Provided always-
(i) that no land on which there is a  mortgage shall
be set aside by the Court under paragraph (a) (i);
and
(ii) that no house accommodation shall be left to or
provided for the debtor under paragraph (a) (ii)
out of the immovalýle properties of the debtor,
consisting in whole or in part of a house or
houses, on which there is a  mortgage; and
8 (iii) no movable properties on which there is a  charge
or lien shall be exempted from the sale under
paragraph (b).
(4) Where property of a  debtor has been said as in sub-'
sec&n (2) provided, the authority which effected the sale
shall pay the proceeds thereof into Court and shalllodge
with the Registrar of the District Court-
(a) a general account of the proceeds realized from the
sale of all movable and immovalýle properties
of the debtor; and

24 CAP. 25.] AGRICULTU~AL DEBTORS;~ :o i
9 of 4/43, (b) a separate account of the proceeds reaIized fromthe
,sale of any portion of such property upon which
any mortgage, attachment, lien or charge (other
than a  mortgage, attachment, Iien or charge in
favour of the AgricuItural Bank of Cyprus
Limited or of any Co-operative Society, as the
cage may be) subsisted on the date on which
the award was made;
(c) a  speciaI account of the proceeds realized from the
saIe of any portian of such property upon which
89 of 4/43. any mortgage in favouT of the AgricuItural
Bank of Cyprus Limited or of any Co-operative
Society, as the cage may be, subsisted on the
date on which the award was made.
Distribution 31. (1) When the Court has saId property of a debtor
of sale
dunder section 30
(2) ,  the Court shall fýrst
Payfrom the
procee s. ,
proceeds of the saIe any amount payabIe as costs of saIe
and next any amount due to the Government by the debtor
as taxes or duties.
(2) Af ter making the payments under subsection (1),
if any, the Court shall proceed as follows-
(a) the Court shall in the fýrst instance appIy the
surpIus of the proceeds reaIized from the saIe of
any portion of the property for which a separate
account under the provisions of section 30 (4)
(b) has been made to the payment of any
10 of4/43. 'amounts payabIe under the award to creditors
on account of debts which are secured by any
inortgage, attachment, lien or charge upon
such property in the order of their respective
priorities, and if such surplus is insufficient to
meet such payments the balance of such amounts
shall, unIess the debt has been extinguished by
such saIe, Tank equally with unsecured debts; 8
(b) the Court shall apply the surpIus of the proceeds
realized from the sale of any portian of the
property for which a  special account under the
provisions of section 30 (4) (c) has been made
, to the payment of any amounts payabIe to the
AgricuItural Bank of Cyprus Limited or to any
Co-operative Society, as the cage may be, secured
by mortgage on the portian of the property
saId;
(c) when there is a surpIus af ter payment of the

"- i
amounts referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b),
the Court shall apply the sum of...such surplus ,~
and of any proceeds reaJized from thi sale of ýI
other property of the debtor to the payment of
any other amounts payable under the award, ýo of 4/43.
and if such sum is insuffýcient to meet such
payment such other amounts shall rafik equally
between themselves for purposes of payment:
Provided that if any amount has been paid
8under the award for the year when an amount
fell due and in consequence of the non-payment
of any other amount which fell due in the same
year an order has been made by the District
Court under section 30 (1), any amount which
fell due in that year, bui which has not been
paid, shall be given priority;
(d) any surplus remaining af ter payment of the
creditors in accordance with the foregoing
provisions of this section shall be paid by the
Court to the debtor.
(3) The proceedings of the Court under this section shall
be in accordance with any R~les made under this Law.
(4) If, af ter the sale of the immovable properties and
movable properties of the debtor (including the immovable
properties which are subject to a mortgage in favour of the ýo of 4/43.
Agricultural Bank of Cyprus Limited or of any Co-operative
Society, as the case may be), the District Court fails to
recover any amount payable under the award, the District
Court shall certify that such amount is irrecoverable and
thereupon the award sha1l cease to subsist and any amount
that was payable under it shall be recoverable by the
creditor to whom it  was payable within two years from the
date on which the award ceased to subsist as if  a  judgment
of the District Court had been entered for its payment on
8 such date in favour of such creditor:
Provided that the Court may postpone suc!! certification
on proof to its satisfaction that there are special reasons
for so doing.
3ý- if a  debtor informs the Board at the earliest oppor- Stay o
df.
.
hh.dLCfprocee ýngs
tumty t   at e  ýnten s  to app y  to a ourt o law to set before the
aside a judgment or order referred to in the proviso to Board.
section 23 (1), the Board may stay turther proceedings for
such time as the Board may consider necessary to enable
the debtor to set aside such judgment or order.
~,

26 CAP.25.] AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. -' i
B~~ to 33 (1) Except as provided in this Law, no Court of law
,:Jo~~er sha11 entertain any action against the debtor and no
proceedings. application made under section 2  of the Sale of Mortgaged
Cap. 233. Property Law shall be entertained in respect of-
(a) any debt included in an application under section 9
or in a  statement under section 18 (1), proceed-
ings in connection with which are pending before
the Board; or
(b) any debt for which any amount is payable under an
award; or
8(c) any debt regarding which an order has been passed
by the Board under section 18 (2).
(2) No Court of law shall entertain any action against
2 of 12/42. any person who is not a  debtor within the meaning of this
11 of 4/43. Lawand who is jointly and severally liable as principal
debtor with, or as surety for, any other person who is a
debtor within the meaning of this Law in respect of-
(a) any debt included in an application under section 9
or in a  statement under section 18 (1), proceed-
ings in connection with which are pending
before the Board; or
(b) any debt for which any amount is payable under an
award unless such award has ceased to subsist
under section 31 (4); or
(c) any debt in respect of which an order has been
passed by the Board under section 18 (2).
Stayand 34. (1) When an application under section 9  or a  state-
~~~~t%~~t or ment under section 18 (1) includes any debt in respect of
applications. which an action is pending before a Court of law or an
Cap.233. application has been made under section 2 of the Sale of
Mortgaged Property Law, the Board shall give notice to the
2 of 13/45. Court or the District Lands Officer concemed in the
prescribed manner, and thereupon the action or appli-
8cation sha11 be stayed until the Board has either
dismissed the application in respect of such debt or made an
award thereon and if  the Board includes any part of such
debt in the award or the Board decides that the debt does
, not exist the action or applicat.ion sha11 abate so far as it
relates to such debt.
(2) Any notice given by the Board to a Court of law or to
the District Lands Officer under subsection (1) sha11
continue in force until revoked or varied by subsequent
notice given by the Board in the prescribed manýýer

8 AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. [CAP. 25. '. 27 i
to the Court or the District Lands Officer, as the c~e -
may be. li
35. Subject to the provisions of section 31 (4) but not- Bar tti f
withstanding anything contained in any Law no judgment ~~~~n~:rt
or order of a  Court of law shall be executed and no further juddgments
d or
.or ers an
proceedings shall be taken under the Sale of Mortgaged of other
Property Law- proceedings.
(a) for the recovery of a  debt included in an appIica- Cap.233.
8tion under section 9 of this Law or in a statement
under section 18 (1) of this Law, unill the appIi- 120/4/43.
catiön has been dismissed by the Board in
respect of such debt; or
(b) for the recovery of a debt incurred by a debtor
af ter the date of an application under section 9
in respect of his debts, unill all the amounts
payable under the award have been paid or
such award h~ ceased to subsist under section
31 (4) gaye where execution for any such debt
can be levied upon any immovable or movable
property of the debtor which is not security
for the amounts payable under the award:
Provided that the provisions of this paragraph
shall not apply to the recovery of a debt incurred
by a debtor af ter the date of an appIication
under section 9 in respect of his debts, where the
debtor has failed to disclose at the time he
incurred such debt that such an appIication has
been made:
36. Notwithstanding anything contained in any Law, any c;::erain~urt
judgment or order of a  Court of law made, and any pro- ~~ ;r~:~ to
ceeding taken for the sale of any immovable property be :e.ated as
under the Sale of Mortgaged Property Law, in regard to a  ~~p~~e;3.
8debt af ter the date of an application under section 9  shall
be treated as a  nulIity in so far as-
(a) it is inconsistent with any order passed by the
Board under section 18 (2) regarding any debt
or with any decision of or determination by the
Board under section 10 or 23 regarding any debt
included in a  subsisting award; or
(b) it relates to a debt the documents in respect of
which being in the possession or under the
control of the creditor have not been produced
by the Board, and marked by the Board ~

28 CAP. 25.J AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. O i
req:uired. by section 19 unless it  is  proved to the
,satýsfactýon of such Court that there were
sufficient reasons for non-production ot the
documents before the Board.
Attachment
37Aft.tflit.dt.
9hof debtor's .er receýp o an app ca ýon un er sec ýon ,  t   e
immovalýle Board may attach the immovable property of the debtor
t~7J~Y' in the prescribed manýýer and thereupon such prope~ty shall
be deemed to be under attachment under the provýsýons of
the Civil Procedure Law, until such attachment is with-
8drawn or cancelled by the Board.
~;;e~~ r 38. No appeal shalllie against any decision or order or
revision~ award by the Board or against any order of a District Court
made under this Lawand no application for revision shalllie
against any decision or order of, or award by, the Board
except as provided in this Law.
~ow~~f 39. (1) Subject to any Rules made under this Law, the
re~~w i~s Board may, on an application by any person interested, at
de~isions'd any time before an award has been lodged with the Registrar
~~:~s~n of the District Court under section 29 (1) review such award
or any decision or order made by the Board in connection
therewith whether such decision or order has been embodied
in the award under section 24 (5) or section 26 (3) or other-
wise and the Board may make such decision or order in
reference thereto as it thinks fýt.
(2) The Board shall not vary or reverse any decision,
order or award under this section unless it  is proved to its
satisfaction that fraud has been committed or that a
manifest error has been made in respect theredi and unless
an opportunity has been given to all the persons interested .
thereunder to appear and be heard in support theredi.
Rectificat.ion 40.(1)  Notwithstandinganythingin this Law con-
8of award ýn .
certain cases. taýned-
(a) upon application by any person interested made to
the District Court of the District in which an
award has been lodged under section 29 (1)
(hereinafter in this section referred to as "the
Court "); and
(b) upon proof to the satisfaction of the Court that
fraud has been committed by a debtor or
creditor in respect of an award which has been
lodged as aforesaid or in respect of any matter

8 ..AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS, [CAP. ~ i
relating either directly or indirectly to such
,award, .
the Court may make an order directing the rectification of
the award subject to such terros, conditions and directions
as the Court may think fit,
(2) Upon the making of an order under subsection (1)
the award sha11 be amended in accordance with the terms of
the order and shall be enforced as amended,
8 41. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Law, the CertainLaw
ýS
o ofnot to app y
provýsýons O -to the
(a)the Evidence Law proceedings
, before the
(b) the Courts of justice Lawand B<?ard under
, thýs Law.
(c) the Criminal Procedure Law, Cap.9.
shall not apply to any proceedings before the Board, ~~: ~55.
(2) The procedure to be followed by the Board in any
proceedings before it  shall, subject to the provisions of this
Law, be in accordance with any rules made under this Law,
42. Subject to any Rules made under this Law, no ~epresenta-
advocate as defined in the Advocates Law, shall represent ~~~;t:fore
any party in any proceedings before the Board, nor s4all the Board.
any other agent, without the permission of the Board Cap. 2.
represent any party in any such proceedings,
43. A copy of any order made by the Board under Publication
section 18 (2) and a  copy of any award sha11 'be published ~~~r::'~rds.
in such manýýer as may be prescribed by rules made under
this Law,
44. Every member of the Board and everyofficer or Certain
fhBpersons
..servant O t   e oard sha11 be deemed to be persons deemed to
., employed in the public service as defined in, and for the be person
d~
fthc, ,ICdemploye ýn
purposes O , e nmýna o e, the public
service.
Cap. 154.
45. All proceedings under this Law shall be deemed to be Proceedings
,d' o
Id' ,
hOhoddeemed to
]U 1Cýa procee ýngs wýt ýn t  e meanýng an for the be judicial
purposes of the Criminal Code, proceedings.
Cap. 154.
46. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Ex~ension of
Law, when the period of limitation is calculated for any ~::~adtiO:n.

30 CAP. 25.] AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. tO i
action, application, appeal, e~ecution ?f judgment o or .
order and for any other proceeding regarding a  debt whých II
has been the subject of any proceedings under this Law, the
time during which such proceedings continued and the time
during which the person interested in such debt was debarred
by any provision of this Law from making or instituting the
action, application, appeal or other proceeding, or executing
the judgment or order, as the case may be, sha11 be excluded.
Negotiability 47. The right to receive any amount payable under an
8of awarded
dhIIb.
bl.O
b d  bR1amounts. awar s  a e  assýgna e  ýn manýýer prescn e y u es
made under this Law.
Offenc.es and 48. (1) Any person who-
renaltýes. o .o
(a) intentiona11y makes a  false statement ýn wntýng or
makes any false statement which has been
recorded whether on oath or not before the
Board in any proceeding under this Law or
in any inquiry made under section 17 ;  or
(b) intentiona11y produces before the Board any false
copy or translation of a  document ;  or
(c) falsely personates another and such assumed
character produces any document or makes
any admission or statement or does any other
act in any proceeding under this Law; or
(d) intentiona11y omits to disclose in any application
or statement of debt any material particular
required by this Law to be disclosed ;  or
(e) being a  debtor, incurs a  debt af ter the date of an
application under section 9 in respect of his
debts without disclosing at the time he incurs
such debt that such an application has been
made ;  or
(1) abets any act punishable under this section,
sha11 be guilty of an offence and sha11 on conviction be 8
liable to imprisonment for a  term of one year or to a fine of
fifty pounds or to both.
(2) No prosecution for any offence under this section
may be commenced except by, ôr with the permission in
writing of, the Attorney-General.
Power to 49. (1) The Governor in Council may make Rwes to be
make Rules. published in the Gazette for carrying out the purposes of
this Law.

8 AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. [GAP. 25. 31 i
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generaIity
,of the foregoing power such Rules may provide for all or
any of the following matters, that is to say-
(a) the maximum and minimum amount of debt which
can be dealt with under the provisions of this
Law'
,
(b) the fees to be paid for anything done under this Law
and the persons by whom and the manner in
which such fees sha1l be paid ;
8 (c) the procedure of the Board ;
(d) the forms of appIication under section 9, of state-
ments of debt under section 12 and awards ;
(e) the manýýer of signing and verifýcation of applica-
tions made under section 9  ;
(f) the manýýer of giving notice under section 16 (2),
section 18 (1) and section 27 (2), and the manýýer
in which a  general notice under section 18 (1)
shall be published ;
(g) the marking of original documents produced under
section 19 (2) ;
(h) the amicable settlement by the Board of debts
under section 20 ;
(i) the summoning and examination by the Board of
parties and their witnesses and the production
of documents under section 21 (1) ;
(j) the determination by the Board under section 23
(2) of the amount of a debt ;
(k) the settlement of debts by the Board under
section 24 ;
(l) the declaration by the Board under section 26 (1)
(a) that a  debtor is insolvent and the reduction
of his debts ;
8(m) the order of payment of the amounts referred to in
section 27 (1) (e) ;
(n) the period within which an appIication under the
proviso to section 18 (3) sha1l be made ;
(o) the distribution of sale proceeds and the proceed-
ings under section 31 ;
(p) the manýýer of giving notice to a  Court of law under
section 34 ;
(q) the manýýer of attachment of immovable property
under section 37 ;

32 CAP.25.] AGRICULTURAL DEBTORS. G i
(r) the manýýer of review under section 39 of a decision,
,order or award made by the Board ;
(s) the representation of a  party in proceedings before
the Board ;
(t) the publication under section 43 of an order made
by the Board under section 18 (2) and of awards
made by the Board ;
(u) the manýýer of assignment of an amatint payable
under an award.
(3) Rwes made under this section may provide for the 8
imposition on offenders against the same of penalties not
exceeding fýve pounds for each offence, and in case of a
continuing offence a further penalty not exceeding two
pounds for each day during which the offence continues
af ter conviction therefor.
Saving. 50. Notwithstanding any of the provisions in section 27
(1) (g) or section 29 (4) contained but save as otherwise in
this Law provided, anyamount or loan to which the proviso
to the defýnition of debt in section 2 appIies-
(a) may be restated under the provisions of any Law
relating thereto ;  and
(b) ma y be recovered from the debtor in such manýýer
and in such proceedings which are prescribed by,
or may be taken under, any Law relating
thereto,
as if  this Law had not been enacted.
Prov~sions 51. Subject to the provisions of section SO, where there is
~~ ~~~~W any confiict or inconsistency between the provisions of this
Lawand the provisions of any other Law, the provisions
of this Law shall prevail.
8