

8
CAP. 2.6.
TYPRUS
8
ACRICUl TURAl FERTIlIZERS
CHAPTER 2.6 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.1.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the 'meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.J
1959

2 CAP. 26.~ AGRICUL:URAL :ERTILIZE~S. , -
CHAPTER 26.
AGRICULTURAL FERTILIZERS LAW.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONcS.
Section Page
1 Short tille ,. "0 2
2 Interpretation 2 a
3 Sale of fertillzer 2 .,
4 Analysis , ...3
5 Penalty for tampering with sack or contents 3
6 Purchaser may obtain analysis by analyst 3
7 Form of certificate of analysis 3
8 Analyst'scertificatetobeprimafacieevidence 3
9 Penalty for breach of Law , 3
10 Reward to informers 4
11 Regulations 4
SCHEDULE 4
To PROVIDE FOR THE PROTECTION OF AGRICULTURAL
FERTILIZERS AGAINST ADULTERATION,
1949Cap.37.
1 of 54. [29th Aprit, 1922.]
3 of 56.
Short tille. 1. This Law may be cited as the Agricultura! Fertilizers
Law.
I~terpreta- 2. In this Law-
týon.
"analyst" means the Government Ana!yst or any
person appointed by the Governor to act as ana!yst
3(a) of 3/56. under the Director of Commerce and Industry for the
purposes of this Law;
"fertilizer" means any substance which has been
subjected to any artiflcia! process and which is imported
into or produced in Cyprus for use as a  fertilizer of the
soil whether mixed with any other substance or not; a
"sack" means a  sack or other receptacle, capable of .,
being seated, used for containing any fertilizer;
"sarnpler" means any person appointed by the
Governor to act as sampler for the purposes of this Law.
Salý;?f 3. No person shall sell or expose for sale any fertilizer save
fertýlýzer. .
kIId  I'
blb.thhkýn sac s c ear y  an egý y earýng upon em suc mar s
and sea!ed with such seal and in such manner as the
Governor in Council may by Regulation prescribe:
Provided that the Director of Commerce and Industry

8 AGRlCULTURAL FERTILIZERS. [CAP. 26. '3 i
may m his discretion, by writing under his hand and subject o{lJ'7.6
to such conditions as he may prescribe, permit the sale of a o 3 5 .
any fertilizer, whether by wholesale or retill, notwith-
standing that the fertilizer is not contained in sacks and
is not sealed as aforesaid.
4. The analyst or a  sampler may take a sample from any Analysis.
fertilizer for analysis. The analyst or sampler may seal up or
otherwise secure the whole or a  part of the fertilizer from
8 which the sample is taken pending the completion of the
analysis of the sample, and the owner or person in possession
of such fertilizer shall retam the same so sealed up or other-
wise secured by the analyst or sampler and shalI not tamper
with the fertilizer or any seat thereon:
Provided that the analysis shall be completed within
twenty days from the taking of the sample; and if the
analysis be not completed within twenty days as aforesaid,
the owner or person in possession may selI or otherwise
dispose of the fertilizer from which the sample was taken.
5. Any person tampering with any sack containing fer- Penalt~ for
tilizer or with any mark placed upon any sack or with any ~~ý~~gor
seat with which a  sack is sealed or in any way mixing or :ntent~.
altering any fertilizer ili. any sack shalI be liable to imprison-
ment for the period of six months or to a fýne of one hundred
pounds or both such punishments, and any sacks or fertilizer
contained therein in respect to which the offence shall be
committed shall be liable to be confýscated.
6. Any purchaser of any fertilizer shall be entitled, on the Purchaseý:
payment of the prescribed fee, to have it analysed by the :~:S~s~;
analyst and to receive from him a certifýcate of the result of analyst.
his analysis.
87. The analyst's certifýcate of analysis shall be in the form F%:Oft f
set forth in the Schedule hereta or to the like effect. ~~aly~i~. e °
Schedule.
8. At the hearing of any charge of an offence under this Anaý;:t's
Law or any Regulations made thereunder the production of ~~r:ýe pa,~:ýa
the certifýcate of the analyst shall be suffýcient evidence of f~~
the facts therein stated, unless the person charged shall evý ence.
require that the analyst shall be called as a  witness.
9. Any person committing a breach of or failing to comply P~nalty for
.
thth..fh.
LfCL.dbreach of
wý e provýsýons o t  ýs aw or o any Reg 'atýons ma e  Law.
thereunder for which no penalty is prescribed or obstructing
c. x

4 CAP.26.] AGRICULTURAL FERTILIZERS. e i
any officia! carrying into effect this Law or any ReguIations
made thereunder shall be liabIe to a  fine not exceeding one
hundred pounds and any sacks or fertilizer in respect of
which the offence shall be committed shall be liabIe to be
confiscated,
~eward to 10. Upon the conviction of any person on any charge for
mformers.
ffdh.LRu1t'dthan o ence un er t  ýs aw or any eg a  ýons ma e ere-
under the Court before whom the charge has been heard
may make any order that the Court may think fit awarding 8
the whole or any portian of any fine to be paid to the person
on whose information the charge has been Iaid,
Regulations. 11. The Governar in Council may by Reguýations pre-
scribe-
(a) the kind of sacks in which fertilizers may be sold;
(b) the marks to be pIaced upon the sacks containing
fertilizers;
(c) the seals to be used in sealing the sacks containing
fertilizers;
(d) the manýýer and times at which fertilizers, which are
not imported in sackg, may be pIaced in sackg;
(e) the persons authorized to supervise or perform any
operation prescribed by this Law or any Regu-
Iations thereunder; and
ýt) the fees to be paid in respect of any matter or thing
prescribed by this Law or any Regulations made
thereunder,
SCHEDULE.
(Schedule 7.)
FORM OF CERTIFICATE.
To ,  the undersigned, do hereby certify that i
8received on the day of 19 ,from a
sample labelled for analysis and i have analysed the same, and
declare the result of my analysis to be as follows:-
i  am of opinion that the same is a sample of gennine
01'
i  am of opinion that the said sample contained the part as under, or the
percentages of foreign ingredients as under:-
Observations.
As witness my hand this day of at ,