

o CAP. 2.8.
CYPRUS
8
ACRICUL TURAL PRODUCE
(EXPORT)
CHAPTER 2.8 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
; ,
ý95~

2 CAP.28.] AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE(EXPORT). O
~,:;.:'
CHAPTER 28. c  .",",,""
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (EXPORT).
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONSo
Seclion Page
ý Short title ..0 o', 2
2 Interpretation 2
3 Application of the Lawo.. 3
4 Prohibition of export without inspection 3
5 Notice to be given of intention to export ...o.. 3
6 Examination by inspectors 3
7 Duty of consignor to remove rejected agricultural produce ...3
8 Reguýations 0.0 4
9 Penalties 5
FIRST SCHEDULE.
Agricultural Produce 6
SECOND SCHEDULE.
Places of inspection 7
A LAW TO PROVIDE FOR THE GRADING AND PROPER PACKING
AND THE EXAMINATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE
,e" INTENDED FOR EXPORT.
~~':t~~.39. [ýst September, 1933.]
3 of 56.
.',"", Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Agricultural Produce
(Export) Law.
I~terpreta- 2. In this Law-
~:;'50/54. tt agriculture" includes horticulture, fmit growing,
seed production, dairy farming and animal breeding
and keeping and tt agricultural" shall be constmed
accordingly;
2  of 50/54. tt agricultural produce" means the products of
agricultural operations in the Colony set out in the First
First Schedule to this Law, and includes articles of food or i
Schedule. drink wholly or partly manufactured or derived from
any such product set out in the said Schedule:
Provided that the Goveroor in Council may from
time to time add to, delete from, substitute for or vary,
anything mentioned in that Schedule;
tt consignor" means the person who exports or
causes or permits to be exported ~ny agricultural
pJ"P4~çe and includes his agent; .-

8 !GRICULTURAL PRODUCE (EXPORT). [CAP. 28
"  export" or "  exported "  means export or exported
for the purposes of sale; -
"  place of inspection "  means any place mentioned in
the Second Schedule to this Lawand shall Ýnciýýde any ~~o~dý
other place which may be declared from time to time c e u e.
by notice under the hand of the Director of Commerce 3(a) of 3/56.
and Industry published in the Gazette to be a place of
inspection for the purposes of this Law;
"  produce inspector "  means an officer of the Depart- 3(b) of 3/56.
8ment of Commerce and Industry generally or specially
authorized by the Director of Commerce and Industry
to examine and pass agricultural produce for export;
"  Regulations "  means any Regulations made under
this Law.
3. The pr<?visions of this Law shall apply o~ly to the ~fPlý~ec~~o:.
export of agncultural produce to any country whých may be
declared from time to time by the Governor in Council by
Order published in the Gazette to be a  country to which the
Law shall apply.
4. No
Person shall export or cause or permit to be ex- Prohibition
.of export
ported or attempt to export any agncultural produce or without
shall aid or procure its exportation whether directly or inspection.
indirectly from Cyprus to any country in respect of which
an order has been issued under section 3, unless such pro-
duce has been examined by a  produce inspector in accord-
ance with the provisions of this Lawand passed for export.
5. Any person who intends to export agricwtural produce ~otice ~o be
from Cyprus to any country Ýn respect of which an order has f~~::ý~n to
been issued under section 3 shall give notice of his intention exporto
in accordance with the Regwations.
6. A produce .insý;>ector may at any place of in~pection ~;amination
8cause an examýnatýon to be made of any agncultural inspectors.
produce intended for export and unless he is satisfýed that
the Regulations with respect to such produce have been com-
plied with he shall reflise to pass for export such produce.
7. if the produce inspector refuses to pass for export any Dut:J! of
rt.
aldhhllfh.h.consýgnoo
consignment of agncultur pro uce e s  a ort wýt gýve re~ove
notice in writing to the consignor stating the reasons for reJÝ:cte
ýd
tur  i
d.
hII.h.h.dbagncu a
refusal an the consýgnor s  a wýt ýn suc peno as may e  produce.
prescribed by the Regulations remove the consignment from
the place of inspection and shall be liable to defray any
..

~
expenses incurred in storing the produce pending removal.
Any agricultural produce not so removed within such period
may be destroyed at the expense of the consignor on the
authority of the produce inspector, or it  may be disposed of
in any way the produce inspector may deem fýt.
Regulations. 8. The Governor in Council may from time to time make
Regulations to be published in the Gazette for all or any of
the following matters that is to say-
(a) the time and place at which and the manýýer in
8which notice of intention to export any agricul-
tural produce sha!l be given;
(b) the condition of agricultural produce intended for
export and the manýýer in which such produce
sha11 be graded, packed, classifýed and marked;
(c) the size, description, quality and material of the
receptacles or boxes in which any agricultural
produce may be exported and the manýýer in
which such receptacles or boxes shall be marked;
(d) the fees to be paid by the consignor for the inspec-
tion and re-inspection and the grading, packing,
classifýcation or marking of any agricultural
produce intended for export and the method of
payment of such fees;
3(a) of 50/54. (e) the regulation of the erection and ticensing of
buildings for storage, grading, blending, packing
and treatment. of agricultura! produce, the
maintenance of such buildings in a clean and
sanitary condition and the fees to be paid for
such licensing;
(f) the time within which any agricultura! produce
which has not been passed for export shall be
removed from any place of inspection;
(g) the manýýer in which the produce inspector may
8mark receptacles or boxes of agricultura! produce
passed for export or which the produce inspector
has refused to pass for export;
3(b) of50/54. (h) the control of the methods to be followed in the
picking, conveyance, handling, stacking or load-
ing of the agricultura! produce, the precautions
to be taken by persons engaged therein and
generally the protection of such produce from
damage;
3(b) of 50/54. (i) the determination of the type of ships by which the

8
agricultural produce sha11 be conveyed and the :1: ";
class of accommodation to which any such
produce may be consigned and the manýýer in
which such produce shall be stored;
(j) the form of notice under section S and such other
forms as may be required for the purposes of
this Law;
(k) genera11y for the better carrying out of the purposes
of this Law.
8 9. (1) Any person who- Penalties.
(a) acts in contravention of section 4; or
(b) obstructs a  produce inspector in the lawful execu-
tion of his duty; or
(c) contravenes or fails to comply with any Regulations
with which it  is his duty to comply,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction
to a  fine not exceeding one hundred pounds or to i~prison- 4  of 50/54.
ment not exceeding six months or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
(2) Any produce inspector who passes, grades or classifies
agricultural produce otherwise than bana fide to the best of
his knowledge and ability sha11 be liable to a fine not exceed-
ing fifty pounds or to imprisonment not exceeding six months
or to both such fine and imprisonment.
8
[SCHEDULE

6 _C~P. 28.] AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (EXPOR) 8
56 Vol. 1149. FIRST SCHEDULE~
(Section 2.)
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE.
Class I.
CITRUS: (i) Bitter oranges. Grapefruit. Mandarines.
Sour lemons. Sweet lemons. Limes.
Oranges. Tangerines.
(ü) Citrus juice.
(iii) Dried skins of
citrus.
8Class II.
FRUIT: Apples. Apricots. Bananas.
Chemes. Figs. Grapes.
Melons. Peaches. Pears.
Plumg. Pomegranates.
Class III.
DRIED FRUIT: Apricots. Apples. Cherries.
Figs. Peaches. Plumg.
Class ýv.
VEGETABLES: (i) Potatoes. Colocass.
(ii) Onions and onion
sets.
(iii) Beetroot. Cucumber. Cauliflower.
Carrot. Celery. Cabbage.
Globe artichokes. Leeks. Lettuce.
Spinach. Tomatoes. Vegetable
marrow.
Class V.
(i) DRIED HERBS: Chamomile. Hemp. Horsemint.
Marjoram Origanum. Sage.
Sweetmint. Thyme. Sumac.
(ii) TOBACCO: Fumigated. Yellow leaf. Virginia.
Class vý. (DRIED SEEDS):
(i) CEREALS: Barley. Wheat. Oats.
(ii) DRY LEGUMES: Broad Beans. Chickpeas. Cowpeas.
Haricots. l.entils. Louvana.
Peas. Vetches (vicos
and rovi).
8(iii) AROMATIC SEEDS, ETC. :
Aniseed. Cuminseed. Linseed.
Sesame.
(iv) SEEDS FOR PLANTING:
Vegetable seeds. l'"lower seeds.
Class výý.
NUTS: (i) Almonds. Hazemuts. Wamuts.
Other nuts.
(ii) Sugared nuts.
Class výýý.
VINE PRODUCTS: Grape juice. Raisins.

8 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (EXPORT). [GAP. 28. -7
.
Class ýx.
CAROB AND ALIYE PRODUCTS:
Carobs and carob Olives. Olive oil.
products.
Class x.
MISCELLANEOUS:
(i) Honey.
(ü) Cheese.
(iii) Wool.
8(iv) Cotton.
(v) Hides and Skins of animals.
(vi) Dried skins of pomegranates.
SECOND SCHEDULE.
(Section 2.)
PLACES OF INSPECTION.
Port of-
FAMAGUSTA: (a) Stores within the Custom House area.
(b) Famagusta Harbour Railway Shed.
KARAVOSTASI: Stores within the Custom House area.
KYRENIA: Stores within the Custom House area.
LARNACA: Stores within the Custom House area.
LIMASSOL: Stores within the Custom House area.
P APHOS: Stores within the Custom House area.
Railway Stations-
MORPHOU: Railway warehouses (for rail-bome goods only).
NICOSIA: Railway warehouse (for rail-bome goods only).
8
~