

8 CAP. 2.9. i
TYPRUS
8 ,
ANIMALS CERTIFICA TES
CHAPTER 2.9 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
[Appointed by the Govet'nment of Cypt'us the Govet'nment Pt'intet's of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907.]
1959

2 CAP. 29.] ANIMALS CERTIFICATESo G i
CHAPTER 29.
ANIMALS CERTIFICATESo
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONSo
Section Page
1 Short title ..0 o'. 2
82 Interpretation 2
3 Certificate of ownership 2
4- Possession, etc. of animal without certificate of ownership prohibited... 3
5 Seller's certificate of ownership to be delivered before issue of new
certificate 3
6 Penalty 4-
7 Sale of animals in contravention of section 4- or 5 void... ...4-
9 Saving 4-
FIRST SCHEDULE.
Cerliftcate of Ownership 4
SECOND SCHEDULE.
Fees 5
A LA W TO MAKE BETTER PROVISION FOR THE ISSUE OF
CERTIFICATES OF OWNERSHIP OF ANIMALSo
1949Cap.41. [1st October, 1947.]
Short title. 1. This Law may be cited as the Animals Certifýcates
Law.
I~terpreta- 2. In this Law-
týon. .
"  anýmal" means any horse, mwe, donkey, camel,
sheep, goat, swine, ox or any other neat cattle whatso-
ever but does not ÝncIlide the unweaned offspring ot any
such anÝmal ; -
"  certifýcate of ownership "  means a certifýcate issued
8under the provisions of section 3  of this Law;
"  quarter "  means quarter of a  town or ot a  yillage.
Certifica~ of 3. (1) The mukhtar of every village or quarter sha1l, upon
ownershýp. the demand of any person residing within the village or
quarter and upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue to
such person a  certifýcate of ownership of any anÝmal which
such mukhtar knows to belong, or is shown to his satisfaction
that it  belongs to such person.
~:~ule. (2) A certifýcate of ownership sha1l be in the form and

8 ANIMALS CERTIFICATES, [CAP. 29. 3 i
sha1l contain the particulars set out in the First Schedule to F
Scirhstd  1th'
Le u e,
ýs aw,
(3) Upon proof to the satisfaction of the mukhtar of the
village or quarter who had issued a  certificate of ownership
that such certificate has been lost or destroyed, such
mukhtar may, on payment of the prescribed fee, issue
another such certifýcate to the person entitled thereto
marking the same as a  true copy of the original, and such
copy shall be valid and effective for all the purposes of this
8 Law.
4. Notwithstanding anything in any other Law contained, Possession,
noPerson sha1l- etý:' of
anýýnal
(a) have in his possession any animal without having a  :~~~te
certifýcate of ownership in respect thereof ; of ownership
prohibited.
(b) huy any animal, unless-
(i) the seller produces to him the certifýcate of
ownership in respect ot such animal; or
(ii) the seller, if  he is not himseli the owner of
the animal, produces to such person the certifý-
cate of ownership in respect of such animal and
satisfýes him that he has authority to sell the
ammal.
5. (1) Upon the sale of an animal, the seller sha1l deliver Seller's
to the mukhtar of the village or quarter within whose area cefrtificatehihIkIh'
fýhi'fO owners p
t   e sa e ta es p ace t   e certý cate ot owners p  ýn respect o to be
such animal and thereupon such mukhtar sha1l issue a
bdelfiver~Ð
'
fifhifh,aL,hfhe ore ýssue
certý cate O owners p or suc amm ýn t  e name o t   e  of new
buyer recording also thereon in the "  Remarks "  column in certificate,
such certifýcate the seller's name and address, the number of
his certifýcate and the place at which it  was issued.
8(2) Upon the issue of a  certifýcate of ownership in the
name of the buyer as in subsection (1) provided, the
mukhtar shall-
(a) if  all the animals mentioned in the seller's certifýcate
of ownership have been sold, forthwith destroy
the seller's certifýcate ;
(b) if  part only of the animals mentioned in the seller's
certifýcate of ownership has been sold, return to
the seller his certifýcate of ownership af ter
recording thereon in the "  Remarks "  column in
such certifýcate the animals sold.
c, y

4 CAP. 29.] ANIMALS CERTIFICATES. O
Pena.Ity. 6. Any person who acts in contravention of any of the
provisions of section 4 or 5  of this Law shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable to imprisonment not exceeding
six months or to a fine not exceeding twenty-five pounds or
to both such imprisonment and fine and the Court may, in
addition to any punishment, order that any animal in
respect of which the offence has been committed, being the
property of the person convicted, shall be forfeited.
S~es oýf .7. Irrespectively of any proceedings which may be had or
anýma s ýntakalf.
aL..fh.8contraven- en, a  s e o any amm ýn contraventýon o t  e  prový-
ti9.n
ti°f4sions of section 4  or 5  of this Law shall be void and of no
sec on or
5 void. effect.
Fees. 8. The fees set out in the Second Schedule to this Law
~~~le. shall be payable in respect of the matters therein set out to
the mukhtar issuing the certificate of ownership.
Saving. 9. Any certificate issued under the provisions of any of
the Laws repealed by this Law,. in force on the date of the
coming into operation of this Law, shall be deemed to have
been issued under the provisions of this Law.
FIRST SCHEDULE.
(Section 3.)
THE ANIMALS CERTIFICATES LAW.
Certificate of Ownership.
No. VillagejQuarter
Remarks.
Kind
Name and and sex
address of Particulars of Date and
of owner. animal. transaction. initials of
mukhtar .
, 8
Dated
(Signature)
, Mukhtar of ViUage/Quarler.
"""" .,=! , ,
cc" .For footnote see page opposite.
"

8 .ANIMALS CERTIFICATES. [CAP. 29. 5 i
SECOND SCHEDULE. ~
(Section 8.) :1
FEEs.
1. (a) For each horse, mule, donkey, camel, ox or any other
kind of neat cattle, up to ten 25 mils.
(b) For each of the anima!s in paragraph (a) of this item
af ter the first ten in respect of the same transaction ýo mils.
2. (a) For each amma! other than those enumerated in item 1
8of this Schedule, up to ten , ...5 mils.
(b) For each of the animals in paragraph (a) of this item
af ter the first ten in respect of the same transaction 3 mils.
3. For each copy of any certificate of ownership, same fees as for the
ongina!.
.The following Laws were repealed by this Law:-
Law. .i Extent of repeal.
1. The Instruction or Law as to the measures proper to be 1. The whole.
taken and carried out for the prevention of theft of oxen,
buffaloes, asses and other gregarious animals contained
on the 742nd page of the fýrst volume of the Destour
(referred to in item (44) in the Fourth Schedule to the
Courts of ]ustice Laws, .1935 to 1947).
2. The Cattle Certifýcate Law, 1889 (9 of 1889). 2. The whole.
3. The ViIIage Authorities Laws, 1931 to (No. 2) 1937. 3. Paragraph III of
Part I  of the First
Schedule (as set out
in Law 12 of 1937).
-
8
Y (2)