

8 CAP. 36. i
CYPRUS
8
BUILDING (PAPHAS IESITED VILLAGES)
PIOHIBITION
CHAPTER 36 OF THE LAWS
1959 EDITION
8
PRINTED BYj
C. F. RÖWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAV, LONDON, W.l.
[Appoin/ed by the Government of Cyprus the Government Printers of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Stalutes) Act, 1907.]
1959

~ CAP.36.] BUILDING(PAPHOS)PROHI::;;: e i
CHAPTER 36.
BUILDING (PAPHOS RESITED VILLAGES)
PROHIBITION.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Setition Page
1 Short title 2
82 Interpretation 2
3 Definition of prohibited areas o" 3
4 Prohibition of erection of dwelling houses in prohibited areas o o. 3
5 Law to be in addition to the provisions of Cap. 35 4
--
A LAW TO PROHIBIT THE ERECTION OF DWELLING HOUSES
IN AREAS OF CERTAIN VILLAGES IN THE PAPHOS
DISTRICT WHICH ARE BEING RESITED ON GEOLOGICAL
AND ADMINISTRATIVE GROUNDS.
40/58. [15th March, 1958.]
Whereas the villages of Anadhiou, Malounda and Ma-
moundali in the Paphos District are being resited on
geological and administrative grounds and the owners of
dwelling houses in the aforesaid villages have each been
given a  free grant of a  site and a framework house by
Govemment:
An whereas the public interest requires that provision
should be made prohibiting the "building or re-building of
dwelling houses on the former sites of the aforesaid villages :
BE it, therefore, enacted by His Excellency the Governor
and Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Cyprus as
follows :-
Short titleo 1. This Law may be cited as the Building (Paphos Resited
Villages) (Prohibition) Law, 1958. 8
I~terpreta- 2. In this Law, unless the context otherwise requires-
tion. tt building" includes any structure or erection of
whatever material and any part of a building so
defýned ;
tt Director" means the Director of Lands and
Surveys and includes any officer appointed by the
Director for all or any of the purposes of this Law;
tt dwelling house" means a  building intended to be
used or so adapted as to be used or to be capable of
--

8 BUILDING (PAPHOS) PROHIBITION. [GAP. 36.3 i
being used for human habitation, or in respect of which
there is a reasonable presumption that some person has
his lodging therein ;
tt erecting "  and tt erect ",  respectively, in relation to
a building Ýnciýýde alteriýýg, adding to, repairing or
re-erecting ;
tt resited village" means the villages of Anadhiou,
Malounda and Mamoundali in the District of Paphos.
83. (1) Within three months from the date of the coming Definition
.
tt.fh.
LthD.tof prohibited
ýn o  opera ýon o t  ýs aw, e ýrec or- areas.
(a) sha11 cause to be specifýed and marked on the
Govemment survey plan of each resited village
the built up area of that village as on the 1st day
of january, 1958 (in this Law referred to as
,t the prohibited area ") ;
(b) shall sign and deposit such plans in the offices of
the Commissioner of Paphos and the District
Lands Officer at Paphos ;  and
(c) shall cause a  notice of such deposit to be published
in the Gazette.
(2) Any plan prepared and deposited in accordance with
the provisions of subsection (1) may be inspected by any
person interested during the hours during which the said
offices are open to the public and any such person may, on
payment of the prescribed fee, obtain a  copy of any such
survey plan duly certifýed by the Director.
(3) A copy of any such plan or any part thereof duly
certifýed by the Director as a true copy sha11 in all
proceedings be admissible in evidence in. proof of the
contents thereof.
4. (1) No person sha11- Probibition
)dIlih.h.hhib.dof erection of8(a erect any we ng ouse wýt ýn t  e pro ýte dwelling
area of a resited village or use or allow or suffer hou~~.~nd
any building thereon to be 'used as a  dwelling ~~~~.1 e
house;
(b) save with the approval of the Commissioner, erect
any dweIling house within that area of a resited
village which is within half a  mile of the boun-
daries of the prohibited area of such resited
village or use or allow or suffer any building so
situated to be used as a dwelling house:
Provided that nothing in this section contained shall

4- CAP.36.] BUILDING (PAPHOS) PROHIBITION. O i
prevent or restrict the use of the prohibited area or any part
thereof for any purposes other than erecting thereon a
dwelling house or using any building thereon as such.
(2) Any person who acts in contravention of subsection (1)
sha11 be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to
imprisonment for a  term not exceeding three months or to
a fiile not exceeding fýfty pounds or to both such imprison-
ment and fiile and the Court trying the offence sha11 order
that the dw.elling house in respect of which the offenc~ h~s
8been commýtted sha11 be pulled down or removed wýthýn
such time as may be specifýed in the order.
;a~~~ti~n 5. The. provisions. of this Law sh.a~ be in additiü.n .to,
t? the provi- and not ýn derogatýon of, the provýsýons of the Buýlding
~~;~ ~:. (Paphos Earthquake) Prohibition Law.
8
;
..; "
: co- :' ,ii',
-.,
.: i , ,.:, .ý
;J.., ;i "..