

8 CAP. 38. i
TYPRUS
8
CENSUS
CHAPTER 38 OF THE LA WS
1959 EDITION
8 ,
PRINTED BY
C. F. ROWORTH LIMITED, 54, GRAFTON WAY, LONDON, W.l.
[A ppointed by the Govef'nment of CYpf'US the Govef'nment Pf'infef's of this Edition
of Laws within the meaning of the Evidence (Colonial Statutes) Aý;t, 1907.]
1959
c. dI

: CAP. 38.J CENSUS. G i
CnAPTER 38.
CENSUS.
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
Section Page
1 Short title 2
2 Interpretation 2
83 Power t? Governor in Council to direct taking of census ...2
4 Regulations 3
5 Appointment of Superintendent 3
6 Duty of Superintendent to carry out census 3
7 Appointment of Census Officers 3
8 Census Officers' Oath 4
9 Superintendent to prepare reports 4
10 Access to records ,. ...4
11 Secrecy of census returos 4
12 Offences and penalties 4
13 Expenses of Superintendent to be defrayed out of general revenue ...5
SCHEDULE.
Oath by Census Officer 6
A LA W TO MAKE BETTER PROVISION FOR THE TAKING OF
CENSUS.
1949Cap.56. [6thjune,1946.J
Short title. ý. This Law may be cited as the Census Law.
Interpre- 2. In this Law-
tation. "  census" includes the collection of statistical
infomýation respecting the property, production, trade,
employment, earnings, health, education or any condi-
tion of the people ;
"  Census Officer "  means any person appointed under
section 6 (a) of this Law;
"  Superintendent" means the person appointed by
the Governor under section 5  of this Law to carry out
8the taking of any census and includes any person
appointed to be an Assistant Superintendent.
Power to .3. Subject to the provisions of this Law, it  shall be lawfu!
Goveroor ýn
fthG.C.
1bOdft..
Council to or e overnor ýn ouncý y r er rom ýme to tIme to
direct taking direct that a  census shall be taken in Cyprus, or any part of
of census. Cyprus, and any Order under this section shall be published
in the Gazette and it may prescribe-
(a) the date on which or the period during which such
census is to be taken;
-

8, CENS us. [CAP. 38."" 3 i
(b) the persons by whom and with respect to whom the
returns for such census are to be made ;
(c) the particwaýs to be stated in the returos.
4. For the purpose of enabling any Order in Council Regulations.
directing a  census to be taken to be carried into effect, the
Governor may make Regulations to be published in the
Gazette-
(a) providing for the division of Cyprus into areas for
8 the purpose of any census ;
(b) providing with respect to the forms to be used for
the taking of such census ;
(c) requiring the persons by whom and with respect to
whom the returns are to be made to answer any
particwaýs contained in the forms ;
(d) requiring information to be given to the Census
Officers by persons by whom and with respect to
whom the returns are to be made ;
(e) making provision for any other matters with respect
to which it  is necessary to make provision for the
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of
the Order in Council.
5. It shall be lawfw for the Governor to appoint any Appoint-
person to be Superintendent to carry out any census and to ~:;:r~f
appoint such person as to the Governor shall seem desirable intendent.
to be Assistant Superintendent.
6. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to make Duty of
generally such arrangements and do all such things as are ~~~~~ent to
necessary for the taking of a  census in accordance with the carryout
provisions of this Lawand of any Order in Council or census.
Regwations made thereunder and in particwar he shall-
8(a) appoint such persons to be Census Officers as may
seem to him necessary for the taking of a census ;
(b) make arrangements for the preparation of the
necessary forms; and
(c) issue instructions for the distribution, completion
and collection of the forms.
7. All Census Officers shall be appointed in writing under Appoint-
the hand of the Superintendent and the production of such ~e:,~~f
appointment shall be sufficient proof of the authority of such OfficeTs.
officers to act in that behalf for the taking of a census. Such
dý (2)
-
-

4- CAl». 38.1 CENSUS. e
appointment sha1l state the area within which any Census
Officer is empowered to exercise such authority.
Census. 8. All Census Officers sha1l, before entering upon their
g:~rs duties, take oath in the form set out in the Schedule hereto
Schedule. before the Registrar of a  District Court.
Super- 9. The Superintendent shall as soon as possible af ter the
intendent to
k.
ftthtdprepare ta ýng o a census prepare repor s on e census re urns an
reports. shall transmit such reports to the Administrative Secretary. 8
Acce~ to 10. Every person who has the custody or charge of any
recor s. public records or documents, or of any records or documents
of any corporation, from which information relating to the
objects of any census ordered under this Law may be
obtained, or which would aid in the completion of such
census, sha1l grant any person specially authorized in
writing by the Superintendent, access thereto for the
purpose of obtaining such information therefrom.
Secrecyof ll. No returns or other documents made or obtained in
~:f:::s. connection with the taking of a  census shall be open to
inspection by the public and no such returos or other
documents and no information obtained in connection with
the taking of a census shall be admissible or used in evidence
in any civil or criminal proceedings whatsoever except in
criminal proceedings for an offence under this Law.
Offenc.es and 12. (1) if any person (including a  Census Officer)-
penaltýes. (a) wilfully refuses or neglects to compir with or acts
in contravention of any of the provisions of this
Law or any Order in Council or Regulations
made thereunder or of any instructions issued
by the Superintendent under section 6  (c) of this
Law; or
8(b) being a  person required by any Order in Council or
Regulations made under the provisions of this
Law or by any instructions issued by the
Superintendent to make, sign or deliver any
document, makes, signs or delivers or canses to
be made signed or delivered a  false document ;
or
(c) being a  person required in pursuance of any such
Order in Council or Regulations or by any
instructions issued by the Superintendent to

8 CENSUS. [GAP. 38. 5 i
answer any question, refuses to answer or gives a
false answer to that question; or
(d) wilfully obstructs, or attempts to obstruct, the
Superintendent or any Census Officer or person
authorized in writing by the Superintendent,
from obtaining any information to which he is
entitled, or from having access to any records or
documents under the provisions of this Law,
he shall be guilty of an offence and sha1l on conviction be
8 liable to a fýne not exceeding twenty-fýve pounds.
(2) if any person (including a  Census Officer)-
(a) being a person employed in taking a census,
without lawful authority publishes or com-
municates to any person otherwise than in the
ordinary course of such employment any infor-
mation acquired by him in the course of such
employment; or
(b) having possession of any information which to his
knowledge has been disclosed in contravention
of this Law, publishes or communicates that
information to any other person; or
(c) in the pretended performance of duties under this
Law, obtains or seeks to obtain information
which he is not duly authorized so to obtain,
he shall be guilty of an offence and sha1l on conviction be
liable to imprisonment for a  term not exceeding six months
or to a  fýne not exceeding one hundred pounds or to both
-such imprisonment and fýne.
13. Any expenses incurred by the Superintendent in ~xpenses of
connection with the taking of a census or otherwise in in~~~~ent to
exercise of his powers or the performance of his duties under betdefrayed
this Law shall be defrayed out of the general revenue of the ~~ne~l
8 Colony. revenue.
[SCHEDULE

6 CAP.38.] CENSUS. 8
'" --j',
SCHEDULE.
(Section 8.)
OATH BY CENSUS OFFICER.
I, ,  a Census Officer appointed for taking a census under
the provisions of the Census Law, do swear that I  \vill make a  true and
exact ennmeration of all the inhabitants within the area assigned to me ;
that I  win faithfully collect all other particulars as provided for in the
Census Law, and in any Order in Council or Regulations made thereunder,
and in conformity with alllawful instructions which I  may receive; and
that I  will not disclose to any one, except to my superior officefs, an)~
8information respecting any matter or any partiCt1]ar person, obtained by
me in connection with the taking of the cengus.
(Signed)
Census Officer.
.,. -, ,
.1."
8